The HERD Project: Human-Multi-Robot Interaction
in Search & Rescue and in Farming
Anders Lyhne Christensen∗, Kasper Andreas Rømer Grøntved∗, Maria-Theresa Oanh Hoang†,
Alexandra Hettich‡, Niels van Berkel†, Mikael Skov†, Alea Scovill§, Gareth Edwards§, Kenneth Richard Geipel¶,
Lars Dalgaard∥, Ulrik Pagh Schultz Lundquist∗, Ioanna Constantiou‡, Christiane Lehrer‡, Timothy Merritt†
∗University of Southern Denmark, †Aalborg University, ‡Copenhagen Business School,
§Agro Intelligence ApS, ¶Robotto ApS, ∥Danish Technological Institute
Abstract-Large-scale multi-robot systems have numerous potential real-world applications. It is, however, still unclear how a
human operator can effectively engage and control a system composed of multiple autonomous robots, especially in unstructured
and outdoor environments. This paper reports on ongoing work
in the project HERD - Human-AI Collaboration: Engaging and
Controlling Swarms of Robots and Drones, in which we focus on
two concrete use cases from industrial partners, namely farming
and search & rescue. One of the industrial partners, Agro
Intelligence ApS, currently sells autonomous farming robots,
while the other, Robotto ApS, develops autonomous drone-based
monitoring solutions for emergency responders. Both partners
aim to scale their technologies to multi-robot/multi-drone operations. In this paper, we present the two use cases, their differences
and similarities, challenges and preliminary results.
Index Terms-human-robot interaction, search and rescue,
agricultural robotics, swarm robotics
I. INTRODUCTION
Robots and drones take on an increasingly broad set of
tasks, such as the autonomous farming robot by Agro Intelligence (AgroIntelli) and the drone-based emergency response
systems from Robotto, see Fig. 1. Currently, however, such
robots are limited in their capacity to cooperate with one
another and with humans. In the case of AgroIntelli, for
instance, only one robot can currently be deployed on a field at
any time and is unable to respond effectively to the presence of
a human-driven tractor or even another farming robot working
in the same field. In the future, AgroIntelli wants to leverage
the potential benefits of having multiple robots working in
parallel on the same field to reduce time to completion. A
straightforward way to achieve this is to partition the field
into several distinct areas corresponding to the number of
robots available and then assign each robot its own area.
However, such an approach is inflexible and requires detailed
a priori planning. If, instead, the robots were given the task
collectively, they could potentially coordinate their operation
on the fly and adapt based on local conditions to achieve
optimal or near-optimal task performance.
Similarly, Robotto's system architecture currently requires
one control unit to manage each deployed drone. In largeThis work is supported by the Innovation Fund Denmark for the project
DIREC (9142-00001B).
area search scenarios and operations with complex terrain, the
coverage provided by a single drone is insufficient. Multiple
drones can provide real-time data on a larger surface area
and from multiple perspectives - thereby aiding emergency
response teams in their time-critical operations. In the current
system, however, additional drones each require a dedicated
operator and control unit. Coordination between operators
introduces an overhead and it can become a struggle to
maintain a shared understanding of the rapidly evolving situation. There is thus a need to develop autonomous droneto-drone coordination and interfaces that enable high-level
management of a multi-drone system from a single control
console. The complexity requires advanced interaction mechanisms to keep the data actionable, simple, and yet support the
critical demands of the operation. This challenge is relevant
to search & rescue (SAR) as well as other service offerings
in the roadmap, including firefighting, inspections, and firstresponder missions.
The move to multi-robot systems raises a whole new set of
challenges compared to the current paradigm where there is a
one-to-one mapping between operator and robot. The operator
must be able to interact with the whole system as a single
entity to set mission priorities and constraints, and at the same
time, be able to intervene and take control of a single robot or
a subset of robots. An emergency responder may, for instance,
want to take control of a drone to follow a civilian or a group
of personnel close to a search area, while a farmer may wish
to reassign one or more of the farming robots to another field.
In the HERD project, we selected two application domains,
SAR and farming, which have several common characteristics
and distinct differences. Both domains involve time-sensitive
missions carried out across geographical areas with planning
conducted by domain experts. Both domains contain inherent
stochastic elements, such as weather conditions. In both cases,
the robots/drones are mobile and have substantial onboard
sensor systems and processing capabilities and must collaborate with other robots/drones and humans. To distinguish the
domains, the SAR drone operating space is in the air with a
focus on a chaotic and rapidly evolving emergency, while the
agricultural operating space is terrestrial and involves longer
timescales with more complex planning and coordination with
(a) (b)
Fig. 1: The robot/drone platforms used by the industrial partners: (a) the autonomous farming robot from AgroIntelli, and
(b) drone with software from Robotto for emergency response
a variety of co-located equipment and personnel.
II. METHODOLOGY
In the HERD project, we divide our overarching goal of
enabling end-users to engage and control multi-robot systems
into four different, but closely related challenges:
• Pre-operation and on-the-y planning: Prior to a mission, the user should be able to provide a plan or a
specification of the mission to be carried out by the multirobot systems, such as the task area, mission priorities,
and constraints. A plan may contain a significant amount
of detail, such as in the case of farming where the robots
must precisely follow crop rows, or only a rough initial
specification of the search area in a SAR operation. In
both cases, however, the end-user must be able to adjust
the plan on the fly, e.g., change the turn radius of farming
robots or modify search priorities in a SAR operation.
• Situational awareness: To be able to trust and use a
multi-robot system, the end-user needs to have confidence
that the system is operating as intended and that it will
continue to do so. This often requires that the user
understands what the system has done, what it is currently
doing, and can approximate what the system will do in
the future [1].
• User intervention: Users need to be able to intervene and
take control of parts of the system, and to dynamically
add and remove units. An emergency responder may, for
instance, wish to take manual control of a drone after
it has detected a heat signature to confirm whether or
not it originates from a person in distress. When a user
is manually operating a single unit or a subset of the
units in the multi-robot system, the remaining robots must
continue to operate correctly and safely.
• Workow and governance: The use of multi-robot
systems changes workflows and roles in the end-user
organizations. When the current one-to-one relationship
between operator and robot shifts to a one-to-many
relationship, some existing roles will become redundant,
while new roles will be created, e.g., related to creating
plans and monitoring the systems during operation. In
the project, we will investigate and design governance
structures that enable efficient interactions between humans and multi-robot systems from an organizational
perspective.
To develop and study methods that enable end-users to
engage and control multi-robot systems in real-world outdoor
environments, we conduct research on planning, multi-agent
systems, and human-robot interaction, combined with frequent
discussions and prototype evaluations with end-users throughout the project. Our two use cases and preliminary results are
presented in the two subsequent sections.
III. USE CASE: MULTI-ROBOT FIELD OPERATIONS
Advances within the field of agricultural robots have made
it possible for Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) to perform
a variety of tasks, including precision farming. Many farming
tasks are monotonous and repetitive, such as seeding, weeding,
and herbicide spraying which in recent years have seen much
attention in both research and industry [2]. A decrease in
available human labor in agriculture has created a market for
autonomous robotic solutions [3], such as the general mobile
farming robot produced by AgroIntelli, see Fig. 1a.
AgroIntelli's solution relies on a proprietary centralized
coverage planning algorithm that creates static plans for a
single robot, see Fig. 2. Multi-robot systems in agriculture
present some general challenges, such as (i) creating user interfaces (UIs) that are easy to learn and master, (ii) supporting
the farmer in creating and adjusting complex field operations,
and (iii) developing robust and effective multi-robot planning
algorithms. The unstructured outdoor environment can present
situations not foreseen during the planning process, which
in turn can decrease performance. Issues must therefore be
resolved as quickly as possible whether autonomously, through
user intervention, or a combination of the two. Examples of
unforeseen situations are, a fallen branch from a tree at the
edge of a field, a newly formed wetland, or a malfunctioning
implement, which often require manual intervention. It is
important that the operator is aware that an unforeseen event
Fig. 2: A section of AgroIntelli's dashboard displaying a plan
and live progress of an ongoing operation
is likely to occur or has already occurred. When dealing
with multi-robot systems, it is vital that the user has a
good understanding of the state of the operation and has the
means to take action against or mitigate issues compromising
performance or safety. Visualizing a highly complex state of an
operation while minimizing the cognitive load of the operator
is one of the main challenges addressed in the HERD project.
Research on route optimization for autonomous robot farming is mostly focused on static planning methods, such as the
vehicle routing problem (VRP), which is a special case of the
traveling salesperson problem [4]. VRP has been generalized
to farming tasks for both single-robot systems and multi-robot
systems [2], [4]-[7]. One of the most important aspects of a
system for real-world use is how it is operated and maintained
by the user. In the project, we will concurrently develop and
fine-tune the UI for human-multi-robot interaction and the
multi-robot control algorithms through an iterative process.
The iterative process combined with periodic feedback from
end-users will help ensure the effectiveness and usability of
the developed solutions in real-world scenarios.
IV. USE CASE: MULTI-DRONE SEARCH & RESCUE
Progress within the field of drone technology has provided
a general platform for sensing for both civil and commercial
use, which has pushed the capabilities of what single-drone
systems can achieve. Our work in the HERD project focuses on enabling the use of multiple autonomous Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) for SAR operations in close collaboration with Robotto and The Danish Emergency Management
Agency (DEMA). SAR operations often have a duration of
several hours. Due to the limited flight time of UAVs, which
is currently a few tens of minutes, an autonomous multi-robot
system needs to take the UAV flight time into account during
pre-operation and on-the-fly planning [8]. The batteries will
eventually deplete and have to be replaced or charged.
A SAR operation's success is highly dependent on elapsed
time, and it is essential that the available resources are
distributed efficiently to minimize the time of the SAR operation [9] as the chance of the distressed person surviving
decreases rapidly with time [10]. In our ongoing work, we are
focusing on minimizing the SAR operation time by enabling
the operator to effectively configure and control the search
effort for multiple, autonomous drones.
In SAR operations, the search strategy is vital and will
change from one mission to another, either based on operator
preferences or the strategy might change based on any available knowledge about the distressed person's condition, the
search area's geographical topology, and so on. It is therefore
important that the operator has the right tools to easily alter the
strategy of the autonomous UAVs, collectively, individually, or
by taking manual control of a single UAV.
SAR operations are often conducted in unstructured, natural
environments, and priorities can change frequently based on
new information received from external sources and on the
results of the ongoing search. The new information can lead
to modification of the search area, the direction of search,
or even the search strategy [11]. In our ongoing work, we are
developing a UI that enables the operator to efficiently change
the behavior of the multi-drone system and respond to the flow
of information about the complex state of a SAR operation.
This will require multi-robot path planning algorithms that are
highly flexible and can accommodate the variability of natural
environments, frequently changing task specifications, and the
dynamic removal and addition of UAVs to the search effort.
The search area is commonly specified as a polygon, along
with any interior no-fly zones. The area is divided into
non-intersecting regions called cells using a decomposition
technique [11]-[13]. A common method for creating coverage plans of a polygonal area is the boustrophedon/snake
pattern [12], and has been widely used for pre-operation
planning in SAR operations [8], [13], [14]. This search pattern
is especially attractive because it is easily understandable
for the operator and can be optimized for quad-rotor UAVs
by minimizing the number of turns in the coverage pattern,
which effectively reduces the time of the operation [15].
An alternative to these methods is formation flying which
is another well-known technique in swarm robotics [16] and
search & rescue [17], and is efficient for covering a large area
continuously and provides robustness to failures of individual
agents within the swarm. Our work focuses on designing dynamic multi-drone planning and coordination algorithms that
are robust to changes in the environment and in the number
of UAVs participating in the search, while still providing the
operator with situational awareness.
Our current prototype allows the user to see active drones on
a map and to allocate multiple drones to the same destination.
We conducted a pilot study where two senior sergeants from
Fig. 3: Early UI prototype for multi-drone control in SAR
operations
DEMA provided their feedback on the prototype, and Fig. 3
is an iteration of the UI based on their feedback. Initial results
are presented in [18], with findings that suggest some level of
UAV autonomy beyond search is needed to safely incorporate
our solution in a real-world SAR environment, as independent
actors such as helicopters and other search personnel will be
present in the search area. One of the senior sergeants also
raised concerns about an operator's ability to reliably examine
video data from multiple drones in real-time, which could lead
to load-induced image blindness. In order for a multi-drone
system to work well, we will study how to provide situational
awareness of not only the drones' behavior, but also determine
when and in what way to process and present the camera
feeds [19], [20].
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have discussed our ongoing work on
enabling end-users to effectively engage and control multirobot systems in real-world outdoor scenarios in the context
of the HERD project. The HERD project started in November
2021 and will finish in July 2025. By the end of the project,
we expect to have conducted multiple field experiments with
our industrial partners using the technologies developed in
the project along with their hardware platforms. The field
experiments are intended to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the solutions and to identify additional improvements. We
expect the solutions developed in the project and findings
from the evaluations will have a direct impact on the products
and services of the partner organizations and lead to increased
efficiencies in agriculture and more effective search & rescue
operations.
