Towards Autonomous Multi-UAV U-space Operation Planning
Kasper A. R. Grøntved∗1, Jes Hundevadt Jepsen∗1, Anders Lyhne Christensen1,
Kjeld Jensen1, Ulrik Pagh Schultz Lundquist1, and Miguel Campusano2
Abstract-One of the main challenges in the real-world
adoption of multi-Uncrewed Aerial Vehicle (UAV) systems lies
in the specification of operations and the management of
dynamic tasks in varied operational contexts. In this paper, we
propose a multi-UAV planning architecture to reduce the level of
specialized expertise necessary for handling multi-UAV systems.
Furthermore, this work is the first step towards designing a
multi-UAV planning architecture that integrates with the Uspace services specified in EU regulatory 2021/664. We propose
two declarative languages: (i) an Agent-Language for expressing
mitigation and safety objectives for individual UAVs, and (ii) an
Operation-Language to enable users to plan high-level multiUAV operations based on the available resources. The languages
enable automatic on-the-fly re-planning if any UAVs abort
the mission unexpectedly. The initial result of the multi-UAV
planning architecture is showcased in three simulated UAVs
running as Software-In-The-Loop (SITL), to demonstrate its
capabilities.
I. INTRODUCTION
For efficient multi-Uncrewed Aerial Vehicle (UAV) operation and deployment in real-world environments, a system
often needs to be easily configurable and display a relatively
high level of autonomy. One of the main challenges is that
the required expert knowledge and the implementation time
increase as both the UAV operation and regulations become
more complex. With the Commission Implementing Regulation 2021/{664/665/666} [3]-[5] in force, the European
Union (EU) implementation of Uncrewed Aerial System
(UAS) Traffic Management (UTM), named U-space, and its
services have begun [6], [7].
Our objective is to reduce the level of specialized expertise
necessary for using multi-UAV systems in different use cases.
We propose multi-UAV planning architecture that enables an
operator to plan and execute an autonomous multi-UAV operation. This work represents a first step towards implementing
U-space services in multi-UAV operations. Although there
are existing solutions to control multi-UAV systems [8]-
[10], an application for multi-UAV operation planning that
conforms to U-space and UTM systems is still lacking.
In this paper, we introduce two declarative languages designed to enhance the capabilities and operational efficiency
of multi-UAV operations. These languages address the key
* Equal contributors to this work and designated as co-first authors.
This work is supported by the Innovation Fund Denmark for the project DIREC (9142-00001B) [1] and the 5G ENabled communication Infrastructure
for Uncrewed Aerial System (GENIUS) project [2], 1K. A. R. Grøntved,
J. H. Jepsen, A. L. Christensen, K. Jensen and U. P. S. Lundquist are with
SDU UAS Center, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
2M. Campusano is with the SDU Software Engineering, University of
Southern Denmark. Corresponding email: {kang, jegj, andc,
kjen, ups, mica}@mmmi.sdu.dk
aspects of UAV operations, namely: the individual UAV
capabilities, and; multi-UAV coordination. Furthermore, the
U-space services specified in 2021/664 [3] are considered
for future integration in the architecture. We present the
following contributions:
• Agent-Language: A declarative language for specifying
the capabilities of each UAV. It encompasses contingency and emergency procedures aligned with the
Specific Operations Risk Assessment (SORA) methodology.
• Operation-Language: A declarative language tailored
for multi-UAV operations. It abstracts the intricacies of
multi-UAV coordination and trajectory planning.
Both languages are defined as Domain-Specific Languages
(DSLs) implemented in textX [11] utilizing ROS and PX4
SITL [12], and the implementation is publicly available [13].
The subsequent sections of this paper are structured as
follows. In Section II, we delve into the current state of
the art within operational planning for multi-UAV systems.
Section III presents the two proposed declarative languages.
Section IV presents the experimental setups and the corresponding experiments. Finally, Section VI concludes on the
results and discusses future work for the multi-UAV planning
framework.
II. STATE OF THE ART
DSLs' ability to provide high-level programming of robot
behavior has been demonstrated in various robotics domains,
such as improving Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) [14] and
task scheduling [15]. This trend is driven by the potential
advantages of increased efficiency, scalability, and adaptability. Within the domain of UAVs, an important field of
study involves the creation of intricate flight plans from
high-level descriptions. Several authors propose the use of a
DSL for automatic trajectory generation and execution [16],
[17], which focuses on HRI and enables non-expert users to
describe a UAV operation, though at the cost of operational
granularity. While the interface of which an operator is
planning an operation is important, the generalization and
granularity are often lost, and therefore a basic scripting
language can be an effective alternative.
Multiple algorithms have been proposed for automatic trajectory generation, focusing primarily on optimization [10],
[18], feasibility [19], and safety through obstacle avoidance [20]. However, in this domain, considerations related
to distributed control are often not taken into account.
Our solution is designed to address multi-UAV operations. Parallel to our approach, FLYAQ [21] also represents
the operation as a collection of geometries, within which
the available UAVs must perform assigned tasks. Alves et
al. [22] have developed DRESS-ML, a DSL to model not
initially predicted events in real environments as "exceptional
behaviors", and employ self adaptive strategies to guarantee
continuous execution.
Though the current approaches take obstacle avoidance
into account, none, to the best of our knowledge, take operational constraints, such as restricted airspace or contingency
regions, into account when the planned operation is executed.
Another emerging research topic is the management of
UAV traffic in low-altitude airspace. Since 2017, when Single
European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) [23] published the
blueprint [24] for the EU implementation of a UTM, called
U-space, several exploratory research and demonstration
projects have been initiated [25]-[28]. The majority of these
projects aim to develop and demonstrate the initial U-space
services, and only a limited amount of this research focuses
on the higher-level representation and implementation of the
U-space services, e.g., using DSLs. Within the area of UAV
research, DSLs are most commonly used for describing the
behavior or task for a single-UAV [16], [22] or execution of
multi-UAV systems [29], [30], but all lacking the integration
of U-space services in their design. Campusano et al. [17]
present a service-oriented U-space architecture with highlevel abstraction models for UAV operations. One of the main
gaps in this work is decision-making procedures in terms of
multi-UAV planning and mitigation actions in contingencies
and emergencies.
Commercial UTM solutions, such as PansaUTM [31] and
Unifly [32], are already available on the market, however,
they target users with dedicated Ground Control Stations
(GCSs) to monitor operations, not leaving the autonomous
decision-making to the UAV. Our work addresses this lack
of high-level definition of decision-making procedures using
DSLs in the context of U-space.
Contribution: The work in this paper is inspired by the
study presented in [17] for UAV operation planning in Uspace, and aims to extend the concept from single-UAV
operations to the multi-UAV domain. We propose an approach that combines the advantages of DSL-based operation
specification with advanced multi-UAV task allocation. Our
work includes operational restrictions, such as mitigation decisions and operation priorities, thus providing a step toward
safe multi-UAV operations. Our work enables operators to
define operational specifications for autonomous multi-UAV
operations, and our experiments are conducted using multiUAV simulations.
III. MULTI-UAV PLANNING ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we introduce the multi-UAV planning
architecture (Fig. 1). It is designed for uncrewed systems,
hereafter referred to as agents, that run the PX4 Autopilot [33], an open-source firmware for uncrewed vehicles.
All the UAVs in the system are connected to a ground
station, where Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2) is used
as communication middleware. We use textX [11] as metalanguage for creating the Agent-Language (Section III-A)
and Operation-Language (Section III-B).
Architecture: The architecture (illustrated in Fig. 1) consists of the following key components; (a) An agent_node
for each agent that handles its communication and highlevel control based on the declarative Agent-Language and
is defined in a preconfigured agent.agt file; (b) An
agent_handler node that monitors all agents present
in the operation and collects relevant information published
by each agent on the heartbeat and metabeat topics.
The heartbeat and metabeat provide the required
information for each agent to the Operation-Language, e.g.
their ID, global position, altitude, and battery level; (c) A
planner_node which is responsible for planning and
allocating tasks defined by the operation.plan to the
available agents. Each agent executes their respective operation in their task_manager_node, and; (d) a U-space
wrapper for ensuring seamless integration with the U-space
Service Provider (USSP).
U-space wrapper: The integration of the U-space services
specified in 2021/664 [3] has been considered in the architecture, but not yet implemented, by the following components;
a traffic_node and weather_node for providing updated information to the agent_node about (i) the adjacent
air traffic utilizing the Traffic Information service, and; (ii)
weather condition and forecast the operation volume utilizing
the Weather Information service; a nrid_node that extracts
the required information for the heartbeat topic and provide the network remote identification utilizing the Network
identification service; a geo_node to provide operational
conditions and airspace constraints to the planner_node;
a auth_node to authorize each individual flight path when
planned by the planner_node, potentially replan if the
flight path gets declined, and; a conformance_node to
inform each agent if a deviation from the flight authorization
is detected and mitigate accordingly.
U-space wrapper
Agent
Agent
Operation-Language Agent-Language
agent_node
/heartbeat
/metabeat
agent.agt
task_manager_node
agent_handler
planner_node
ROS2 topic
ROS2 Node
DSL file
operation.plan
Subscribe Publish Generic SW class
Agent class
Condition classes Condition classes Condition class
Generated SW class
traffic_node weather_node
Service
nrid_node
/task
conformance_node
geo_node auth_node
U-space service
interface
Input
Fig. 1: The multi-UAV planning architecture.
A. Agent-Language: UTM specication language for UAVs
Each agent in a system has its unique capabilities and
behaviors, which are both platform- and payload-specific.
Depending on the type of operation and its environment,
each agent might also have different mitigation and safety
objectives.
The main motivation for introducing a declarative language to specify agents is to provide an abstraction for the
user to express the contingency and emergency procedures
according to the SORA of the operation. The PX4 flight
stack has certain built-in software failsafes, however, they
do not include complex decision making, e.g. in the case of
multiple intruding aircraft in different geographical zones.
The Agent-Language is designed to bridge the gap between
the need for a human-in-the-loop during an operation and
the UAV being able to mitigate situations autonomously.
The framework auto-generates code for each agent, based
on their respective configuration in agent.agt, to lower
the required level of system knowledge for conducting multiUAV operations.
1) Example: Declare a Single Agent: Defining agent
capabilities and mitigation procedures is exemplified in
Listing 1. Each tag in the example starts with the name
of the specific tag and ends with the keyword end. The
example contains contingency and emergency procedures to
showcase how certain mitigation procedures based on the
SORA methodology can be applied and handled by the UAV.
The example presented in Listing 1 is for a UAV operating in
the restricted airspace EK R25 at the UAS Denmark national
drone test center.
Dene geographical volumes: First, the flight geometry,
contingency volume, and air risk buffer are defined using
the volume tags. The import are for including additional
packages containing different capabilities; in this example,
we include restricted airspace EK R25.
Dene the required meta-data and capabilities: After the
volume tag, we define the meta-data and capabilities for the
agent using the agent tag. In this example, we name the
agent quad0, which is a quadcopter with a flight time of 40
minutes and two kinds of payloads; a camera, and a lidar. Its
system ID is 0, and both the naming and ID must be unique
for each agent in the system. The inform tag defines at
what frequency each inform level shall report to the user
when activated.
Dene mitigation procedures: The last two tags,
contingency and emergency, defines the mitigation
procedures for the agent. Three types of contingency and
emergency procedures are included; (i) volume in case of
airspace breach, meaning either an intruding aircraft enters
a defined volume or the agent leaves a defined volume;
(ii) component in case of anomalous system behavior,
meaning a system component has exceeded a defined boundary, and; (iii) weather in case of weather change, meaning
that a weather condition has exceeded a defined threshold.
The Condition class' in Fig. 1 are auto-generated
object-oriented software classes are based on the defined
contingency and emergency. Each class is imported
import airspace [EK]
Volume:
flight_geometry: POLY([10.308,52.470], ... ,[10.310,52
.468])
operational_volume: POLY([10.305,52.471], ... ,[10.311
,52.465])
air_risk_buffer: EK.R25
end
Agent quad0: quadcopter with camera and lidar
Config:
id: 0
flight time: 40 minutes
end
Inform:
notice once
warning every 5 seconds
alarm every 1 second
end
end
Emergency:
volume: agent out of operational_volume activate fts
component: battery level lower than 5 percent activate
fts
component: c2 package_loss higher than 25 percent
activate rtl
weather: wind higher than 15 m/s activate land
end
Contingency:
volume: agent out of flight_geometry activate rtl
component: battery level lower than 30 percent activate
rtl
component: battery level lower than 15 percent activate
land
component: c2 package_loss higher than 15 percent
activate warning
weather: wind higher than 10 m/s activate warning
end
Listing 1: An example of a agent.agt file in Fig. 1,
defining an agent with certain capabilities and mitigation
procedures. Denotes: (rtl) Return to Launch; (fts)
Flight Termination System; (...) List of coordinates.;
(c2) Command and Control link.
by the Agent class, where they are created as objects
and utilized for high-level decision making, e.g. in case of a
low battery level.
B. Operation-Language: Multi-UAV operation planning
Enabling multi-agent operation planning is an important
task in robotics. The ability to coordinate multiple agents
to achieve a common goal is essential in many applications, such as search-and-rescue operations, environmental
monitoring, and warehouse logistics, among others [8]-[10],
[34]. However, the complexity of multi-agent systems can
make it challenging to manually allocate tasks to agents. The
challenge is further exacerbated when tasks are described in
natural language, as such descriptions can lack precision,
completeness, and the interplay between multiple agents. To
address these issues, we propose a method that utilizes descriptive language to enable multi-agent operation planning.
Our approach focuses on the task definitions and the
resources available to the agents in the specific operation,
while at the same time shielding the operator the low-level
task planning details and intrinsic infrastructure of multiagent systems. By creating minimal descriptive language, we
can translate high-level instructions into detailed tasks for a
multi-agent planning algorithm. The language is interpreted
and executed by a series of stages, including task decomposition, trajectory generation, and task allocation, all based on
available resources at the moment of deployment.
Each agent has to continually send heartbeats to the central
unit, to make sure that the agents are connected and aware
of whether any agents are leaving the operation, either with
intent or unintentionally.
search_area = POLYGON(...)
forrest_edge = LINE(...)
Operation WildernessSearchAndRescue using 2 uavs within
bounding_area:
monitor forrest_edge with priority HIGH
monitor search_area with priority LOW
end
Listing 2: A basic example of a operation plan, which
defines different types of tasks with different priorities in
a search-and-rescue operation, where (...) denotes a list of
coordinates
The Operation-Language supports different types of tasks,
which can be specified as geometries. These geometries
include points, lines, and polygons, which can be declared as
variables and later referenced or directly described using the
monitor keyword. A simple example of an operation using
two UAVs is shown in Listing 2.
a) Operation: An Operation essentially results in a set
of tasks that will be executed based on the resources available
at run-time. This means that the initial generation will not
result in trajectories, but will be re-evaluated multiple times
during an operation when UAVs are added or removed from
the operation (it should be noted that a maximum amount of
resources used can be defined in the operation specification).
b) Monitor - Point, Line, Polygon: The tasks defined
by the monitor keyword are all tasks that need to be covered
by a UAV. Each of the tasks employs different movement
strategies, such as stopping at a point, following a line,
and covering the area of an entire polygon using a generic
coverage pattern. Furthermore, the tasks can be given a
priority, LOW and HIGH, which indicates the degree of
urgency to the planner.
The Operation-Language implements the abstraction of
an operation. The language abstracts the complexity of the
multi-UAV operation by considering only the most important
constraints for the planner, such as resources available,
geographical constraints, and tasks. The constraints are, for
example, bounding areas that the agents must stay within and
the number of UAVs that should be used to perform a certain
operation. The language supports the definition of tasks as
different geometries, while the execution of these tasks is
left to the planner. For example, the point and line tasks
are executed without alteration, while the polygon task is
decomposed into line segments using a coverage pattern and
allocated to the agents. This design simplifies the complexity
of UAV operations, enabling operators to define and execute
tasks.
Expressing the operation as a set of objectives in an environment, without explicitly specifying which UAVs have to
perform which tasks, not only simplifies the planning from an
operator's point of view but also enables generalization. The
Operation-Language can thus be used to specify missions
for different kinds of operations, such as search and rescue,
environmental monitoring, and patrolling.
C. Multi-Agent planning
The multi-agent planner implemented embedded in the
framework is a decentralized task allocation algorithm called
CBBA consensus-based bundle algorithm (CBBA) [35].
CBBA is an auction-based algorithm, that iterates between a
bundle-construction phase, in which tasks are assembled into
bundles, and a conflict-resolution phase, in which consensus
about the allocated tasks is reached. If the duration of the
tasks defined in the operation plan exceeds the combined
flight time, then the agents will allocate as many tasks
as possible, and replan when an agent joins the mission
again after being recharged. Furthermore, the implementation
uses an extension such that trajectory tasks are taken into
account [36].
CBBA is a polynomial-time algorithm [35] with the worstcase complexity of the bundle construction for a single agent
of: O(NtLt), where Nt is the number of tasks available
to the agent and Lt is the number of tasks that an agent
can be assigned. Furthermore, CBBA has a convergence
guarantee within max{Nt,LtNu}D iterations, where Nu is
the number of agents and D is the communication network
diameter, which can be Nu at most.
Though the implementation of CBBA is inherently decentralized, the implementation of the Operation-Language is
centralized, which creates a central point of control for an
operator.
D. Planning and Re-planning
Whenever one or more agents join an operation and start
to poll tasks from the planner_node, as seen in Fig. 1,
the planner needs to plan or replan the assignment of the
available tasks for the specific operation.
The multi-agent planner will only initiate a re-plan when
the number of required UAVs in the specific operation
changes, which means that a re-plan will take place whenever
an agent joins or leaves an operation. However, when there
is an excess of agents in the operation and an active agent
leaves the operation, the agents' remaining tasks will be
transferred to an excess agent.
IV. RESULTS
To demonstrate the two proposed descriptive languages, an
end-to-end experiment has been conducted utilizing the PX4
SITL simulation environment [12]. The experiment is based
on the provided examples in Listing 1 and 2. A homogenous
team is considered, containing three UAVs, where only two
are used, as specified in the operation (Listing 2). During
the operation, a single UAV leaves the operation before it
can complete its tasks, which results in a re-planning of
the operation, including the UAV which is not in use. The
Operation-Language generates a set of tasks for the UAVs
to perform and performs online planning when resources
become available in the operation. The architecture ensures
that the operation requirements will be satisfied even in
the case of a UAV leaving the operation unexpectedly and
abruptly stopping the communication if enough agents are
available.
UAV2
Operation End
Timeout
Operation Start
UAV1
UAV3
Fig. 2: Execution timeline of the basic usage scenario described in Listing 2
Figure 2 shows the timeline of events in the example scenario
described in Listing 2, where two agents are required to
perform a coverage search in an environment, though three
agents are available in the operation. As seen in Fig. 2, the
agents are sequentially added to the operation, respectively at
t0 and t1, which trigger the multi-agent planning algorithm.
Suddenly, at time t2 the communication to UAV1 is lost and
after the timeout at t3, the loss of connection is detected
and UAV3 is dispatched as a replacement. The event did not
enforce a re-planning of the operation but simply initiated a
transfer of tasks to UAV3.
The experiment using the example scenario has been
conducted using the PX4 SITL simulation environment in
combination with QGroundControl (QGC) to monitor the
UAVs throughout the operation [37]. The three UAVs are
sequentially instantiated using the generated classes from
the Agent-Language described in Section III-A and execute
the example operation defined in Listing 2. The trajectories
of the UAVs in the experiment are shown in QGC and are
depicted in Fig. 3. Notably, UAV3 seamlessly completes the
unfinished task initiated by UAV1 and follows the same trajectory. Meanwhile, UAV2 remains unaffected and continues
its assigned tasks.
Although this experiment is small scale, the algorithm
can scale well to handle many agents and tasks, while navigating complex non-convex environments. The simulation
results demonstrate that the proposed languages facilitate
multi-agent path planning while maintaining straightforward
operation specifications and supporting specific services of
U-space.
V. DISCUSSION
Our current implementation relies on a central coordinator
for task management, which introduces overhead when coordinating multiple UAVs simultaneously. Advantageously a
decentralized version of the planner_node integrated into
UAV1
(a) UAV1
UAV2
(b) UAV2
UAV3
(c) UAV3
Fig. 3: The UAV trajectories in QGC of the experimental
scenario. Fig. 3 (a), (b), and (c) show UAV1, UAV2 and
UAV3 trajectories, respectively.
each agent, will enable it to mitigate unforeseen events
concurrently and more effectively.
Although the presented results for the architecture are
independent of the U-space framework, we still recognize
the importance of integrating it seamlessly in future work
by considering the existing services in the architecture. The
integration of U-space is still at an early stage [38], meaning
that our work needs to adjust to future changes in the services
as the U-space matures.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we introduced a planning architecture to
facilitate multi-agent operation planning and execution, while
U-space-aware and enabling agents to autonomously mitigate
unforeseen events. The presented work comprises two descriptive languages: the Agent-Language designed for interfacing with the individual UAV and defining their capabilities
and mitigation procedures, and; the Operation-Language
optimized for multi-agent operation planning. The simulation
results demonstrate the potential of our proposed languages
in orchestrating UAV operations with minimal code. By
leveraging ROS2 and PX4 SITL simulation environment, our
approach is a step towards enabling UAV operators to deploy
multi-UAV operations using descriptive languages.
Our ongoing research aims to advance both languages
by creating additional usage examples and deploying UAVs
in practical operational settings in a U-space environment.
Specifically, we intend to enhance time-based task execution,
which is important for scenarios like autonomous patrolling
and environmental monitoring. In summary, our software
framework represents a promising step toward U-spaceaware multi-UAV operations, with future enhancements
aimed at real-world deployments and dynamic decentralized
multi-agent planning.
