Decentralized Multi-UAV Trajectory Task Allocation in Search and Rescue Applications

Decentralized Multi-UAV Trajectory
Task Allocation in Search and Rescue
Applications

Published as: Grøntved, K. A. R., Lundquist, U. P. S., & Christensen, A. L. (2023).
"Decentralized Multi-UAV Trajectory Task Allocation in Search and Rescue Applications". In 2023 21st International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR) (pp. 35-41).
IEEE. https: // doi. org/ 10. 1109/ icar58858. 2023. 10406912 [16]

Chapter Abstract Multi-UAV systems have significant potential to enhance search
and rescue (SAR) operations, since a search area can be covered faster than current approaches when multiple UAVs operate in parallel. While recent advancements within
the field of multi-robot coverage planning have yielded promising results, current algorithms are predominately centralized. In this paper, we present a generalization of the
well-known decentralized consensus-based bundle algorithm (CBBA), that enables efficient
task allocation in multi-UAV SAR operations. The generalized algorithm considers tasks
as trajectories between two points where the traversal direction for each task is optimized
in the task allocation process. We carry out a series of simulation-based experiments on
benchmark problems and compare our results to a state-of-the-art centralized solution.
We find that our novel decentralized approach yields times to completion similar to those
achieved with a centralized coverage path planning approach, with only 1.9% overhead
cost. We furthermore find that our approach performs 6% better than point allocations
while scaling well with the number of UAVs involved in the search effort.

5.1 Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are being employed in an increasingly broad range of
domains, including SAR operations [4, 10], due to their high degree of freedom and capabilities of moving mostly unobstructed through an environment [85]. Currently, single-unit
systems are primarily used, and they tend to be either remote-controlled or have limited
autonomous decision-making authority. Multi-UAV systems, on the other hand, have sig-

nificant potential as the UAVs can operate in parallel and thus cover a search area faster
than a single-unit system. However, for efficient multi-UAV operation, a system needs to
be controllable by a single operator, which means that the system must have a relatively
high level of autonomy, such as the ability to automatically allocate search trajectories to
UAVs given a high-level mission specification [2].
In SAR operations, the search area is commonly specified as a polygon, see Fig. 5.1
for an example. As can be seen in the figure, the search area is further subdivided into
a number of regions, and a set of trajectories (trajectory tasks, shown in red) is defined
for each sub-region. In the example, there are a total of 43 trajectory tasks. The task
allocation problem then consists of allocating a set of UAVs to carry out all trajectory
tasks, such that the time to completion is minimized [7, 8]. This problem is also known as
coverage path planning [86]. For single-unit systems, this often results in the lines being
covered in a boustrophedon pattern [86, 87].

Search area
Line task

Figure 5.1: Example of a search area for a SAR operation given as a polygon (thick black
line). The search area is divided into four sub-regions (dashed lines), and trajectory tasks
(in red) are defined for each sub-region.

The problem of coverage planning is a widely studied field in robotics, see [45,87,97,98]
for examples. Nevertheless, most approaches are centralized and thus require reliable,
continuous connectivity between a base station and all UAVs, which may not be available
in SAR operations that are conducted in large search areas and in remote locations where
communication infrastructure is sparse or non-existent. Also, in multi-robot coverage
planning, it is a common assumption that the area and the available units remain static
throughout a mission. However, since SAR operations often are conducted in a dynamic
and unstructured environment, the search area and sub-regions often change during an

operation [12].
In this paper, we focus on a decentralized algorithm called the consensus-based bundle
algorithm (CBBA) [51]. CBBA is an auction-based algorithm, which iterates between
a bundle-construction phase, in which tasks are assembled into bundles, and a conflictresolution phase, in which consensus is reached. The CBBA does not require direct connectivity between all UAVs in a system to converge to a conflict-free task allocation. In
the original formulation of CBBA, tasks are modelled as points, and the algorithm does
thus not take the trajectorial nature of SAR tasks (lines in the simplest case) into account.
The contribution of this paper is a generalization of CBBA [51] to handle trajectory
tasks to enable decentralized coverage path planning in SAR scenarios. The travel direction for each trajectory task is considered in the task evaluation, which is used when the
UAVs bid for tasks. We establish the efficacy of our algorithm on a coverage path planning
benchmark dataset by converting it into trajectory task allocation problems. Experiments
are carried out to show that the enhancement can improve the baseline CBBA algorithm
by an average of 6% in a range of multi-UAV system sizes and environments. Comparative
experiments show that our decentralized planner has low overhead (only 1.9% overhead
cost compared to the state-of-the-art centralized heuristic solvers for line coverage problems [45]).

5.2 Related Work
Area coverage algorithms can be categorized based on the assumptions they make on the
geometry of an area [4]. One of the more general assumptions is that a search area can
be decomposed into convex cells, which can be covered by a search pattern, such as the
boustrophedon pattern [86]. This search pattern is widely used for pre-operation planning
in SAR operations [45, 87, 88]. Other methods assume that a search area can be covered
by a grid, where each square has to be visited to be considered covered. The latter has
the downside of complexity, where the number of squares increases quadratically with
the size of the search area. A SAR operational area is commonly specified as one or
more polygons [99], along with any interior regions (e.g. obstacles) that robots should
not enter. The area is divided into non-intersecting convex polygons called cells using
a decomposition technique [85-87]. This approach is especially popular since it is easily
understandable by human operators.
The mTSP (Multiple Travelling Salesman Problem) is a well-known NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem [100], for which several heuristic-based methods have
been proposed for solving task allocation problems for multi-robot systems, see for instance [45,87,101]. In a recent study [102], the authors proposed a novel environment partitioning algorithm and modelled it as a mTSP to solve the multi-robot coverage problem.
By minimizing turns, the authors showed that coverage time was reduced significantly for
teams of 1-5 robots in 25 indoor environments. In [98], the MEM heuristic algorithm was
proposed to solve large-scale multi-robot line coverage problems in a centralized manner.
In [45], MEM was then combined with an approach that considers asymmetric costs for
servicing (covering a task) and deadheading (travelling to a task) to model environmental
features such as wind. This allows for solving the area coverage problem for capacity-

constrained robots using constrained optimisation methods, though still in a centralized
manner.
While the above-mentioned algorithms yield promising results, they are centralized.
For multi-UAV SAR in real-world conditions, such a centralized approach would require
the planning to be done by a single centralized entity, that can reliably and frequently communicate with all the UAVs involved in the search effort. For large-scale SAR operations
which often take place in areas where communication infrastructure may be damaged or
absent, such communication requirements may be challenging to meet. Also, the reliance
on a central entity constitutes a single point of failure, which is a major drawback in SAR
operations where robustness is particularly important.
A decentralized system can potentially overcome the shortcomings associated with a
centralized approach. By relying on peer-to-peer communication [103], the task allocation
algorithm can run on each agent simultaneously and the allocation is obtained through the
exchange of information between the agents [104, 105]. The single point of failure can be
eliminated by using decentralized architectures such as auction-based methods [51]. Some
of the simplest auction-based methods are single-assignment approaches where each agent
can only be assigned a single task and where tasks are auctioned one-by-one [12].
One can achieve a near-optimal allocation of a set of tasks when using single-round
combinatorial auctions [106], where bids are calculated based on sets of tasks (bundles)
instead of individual tasks. Each agent's bid corresponds to the minimum path cost of a
bundle, based on the position of the agent. Each agent has to try all permutations of tasks
as a bundle, which is computationally expensive since the number of bids grows exponentially with the number of tasks. The above-mentioned methods rely on a central broker or
auctioneer, whereas other methods, such as the consensus-based bundle algorithm (CBBA)
discussed in further detail below, are fully decentralized [51]. CBBA iterates between two
phases, (i) the bundle-construction phase, where each agent builds its own bundle of tasks;
and (ii) the conflict-resolution phase, where the agents communicate with their neighbours
to reach consensus on who has won which auctions. These phases are repeated until the
algorithm converges to a conflict-free assignment of all tasks. Several extensions to CBBA
have been proposed to expand its applicability, such as asynchronicity [107], heterogeneous
agents [108], time-critical tasks [109] and maximisation of the total number of tasks allocated, thus ensuring the tasks are distributed more evenly [91]. Decentralized methods,
such as CBBA, can have a large impact on the execution of a SAR operation because decentralized algorithms have the general advantage of being more robust to changes in the
environment and not having to rely on stable communication with a ground station [103].
Current auction-based methods often assume that tasks are independent of one another
and that each task can be solved in a single, unique way. This assumption is valid in
previous applications of auction-based methods to non-coverage-based SAR problems, such
as in [110], where each task corresponds to a site with victims. Each task is thus only a
point. However, to solve the coverage path planning problem in SAR for victim localisation,
the spatial nature of coverage tasks, namely that a path between two points must be
travelled to satisfy a trajectory task, and should be taken into account to achieve optimal
plans. Given that a line segment, for instance, can be travelled in two directions, the
distance between two tasks depends on the direction in which each of them is covered.
In this paper, we therefore propose a generalization of the highly popular decentralized

market-based task allocation algorithm, CBBA, where different possible travel directions
are explicitly considered in the computation of plan costs. The resulting algorithm enables
effective decentralized coverage planning for multi-UAV systems in SAR and seamless
integration of special costs for generating task bids, such as including the cost of turning
in the bid.

5.3 The Consensus-based Bundle Algorithm
CBBA [51] is a fully decentralized multi-assignment task allocation algorithm, which implements a greedy auction strategy, and enables agents to auction tasks based on task
bundles built sequentially. CBBA is a well-known and tested algorithm, that provides solutions with a minimum performance guarantee of 50% optimality, assuming that agents
have accurate knowledge about auction winners [51]. The goal of the task allocation
problem is to find a conflict-free allocation of tasks to agents which optimizes a scoring
function, given a list of Nt tasks and Nu agents, where each agent is able to get assigned
Lt tasks [51]. The scoring function assigns a score to a task based on either the time or
distance to the task.
CBBA consists of two phases, a bundle-construction phase where each agent, i, greedily generates a bundle of ordered tasks and a conflict-resolution phase where conflicting
assignments are identified and resolved through local communication. These two phases alternate until a conflict-free task allocation is obtained and satisfies Nmin ≜ min {Nt , Nu Lt },
which means convergence is achieved when either the total capacity, Nu Lt , is reached or
all the tasks, Nt , have been assigned. In CBBA, every agent maintains two different lists
of tasks, the bundle bi and their path pi , where the tasks in the bundle are ordered based
on when the task was added during the bundle-construction phase. The path pi is an
ordered list of non-conflicting tasks added after the conflict-resolution phase, where the
sequence is based on the marginal score improvement in Eq. (5.1), such that the path has
an optimal sequence.
(
0, if j ∈ bi
cij [bi ] = pi ⊕n {j} (5.1)
maxn≤|pi | Si − Si , otherwise,
pi

where | · | denotes the cardinality of the list and the operation ⊕n inserts the second list
after the nth element in the first list. Furthermore, the task j will not provide any reward
if the task is already in the task.
The bundle and path are recursively updated as:

bi = bi ⊕end {Ji } , pi = pi ⊕ni,Ji {Ji } , (5.2)

where Ji is the task resulting in the largest increase of score and ni is the optimal index
in agent i's path.
In the bundle-construction phase, the agents' perception of which agent has the highest
bid for a task is important, as an agent will only add a task to its bundle if it believes that
it has the largest marginal increase in score. Therefore, in the conflict-resolution phase,

each agent communicates both its beliefs about the winning bids, the winning agents, and
the timestamps of the last information update from each of the other agents, and potential
conflicts are then resolved locally using a set of action rules [51]. When an agent is outbid,
the tasks that have been added after the outbid task in the bundle will also be removed,
as the tasks which the scores were calculated from are no longer valid. Otherwise, the
agent could continue to make decisions based on outdated information, which can lead to
degraded performance.
CBBA is a polynomial-time algorithm [51] with the worst-case complexity of the
bundle-construction phase for a single agent of:

O (Nt Lt ) , (5.3)

and has a convergence guarantee within max {Nt , Lt Nu } D iterations, where D is the
network diameter, which can be Nu at most.

5.4 Trajectory tasks
Consider a multi-UAV system tasked with performing a SAR operation in a bounded area.
The goal is to locate any survivors as quickly as possible and thus minimize coverage time.
Assume that the search area, given as one or more polygons, has been divided into line
segments according to some method, e.g. [102] or [45]. To cover the search area, each line
segment must be travelled once by one of the UAVs, and for non-trivial problems, each
UAV must be assigned multiple segments, making the problem a multi-assignment task
allocation problem. For the trajectory tasks generalization, we consider a task, ji , as a
subset of two points, an entry point and a departure point:

ji ≜ {u0 , u1 } (5.4)

The trajectory task abstraction is different from simple point tasks, as we assume that
after a task is completed, a UAV is not in the same location as where the task started
(unless for the special case for non-linear trajectories where u0 = u1 ). For tasks where
u0 ̸= u1 , such as line segment tasks, the scores calculated by the scoring function are
different to those of a point task. The set of tasks that the bidder must evaluate to create
a bid frequently exhibits significant synergistic potential. The synergy for an agent is
considered positive when the combined cost for executing the tasks together is less than
the sum of performing them individually [111]. The synergies between trajectory tasks
affect the bid more than that of a point task because the agent will end a trajectory task
in a different location than where it started the task. This means that not only the entry
point of a task contributes to the synergies between tasks, but also the departure point.
When an agent adds a trajectory task to its bundle, it has to evaluate the marginal
change in score for adding this task, by calculating the cost of travelling to the task and
the cost of travelling after the task. To maximize the marginal score gain of acquiring
the task, the cost must be calculated for both directions in which a trajectory task can
be performed. Therefore, the agents have to be able to permute the trajectory tasks by
changing the direction of travel based on this optimization.

5.4.1 Trajectory task scoring function
CBBA is a versatile algorithm where task-specific constraints or objectives can be taken
into account by modelling the scoring function. Though the scoring function has to satisfy
a vital property in CBBA called diminishing marginal gain (DMG) [51]. DMG states that
a tasks score cannot increase in value as another task is added to the path before it and
can also be expressed as:
cij [bi ] ≥ cij [bi ⊕end b] (5.5)
In this paper, we use the time-discounted reward as the scoring function which can be
seen in Eq. (5.6):
X τ j (pi )
Sipi = λji c̄j (5.6)

where τij (pi ) is the estimated time for agent i to reach task j, on the current path pi , c̄j
is the static reward for completing the task and λ ∈ (0, 1) the discount factor. In search
and rescue scenarios, specific tasks can have different priorities, these priorities can be
translated into this static reward, to provide a stronger incentive to acquire urgent tasks.
In this paper, we keep the reward constant for all tasks but different rewards can be used
to prioritise critical tasks. To better approximate SAR operations, where UAVs perform
many sharp turns, which results in the UAV having to decelerate to a near stop, the turn
cost is modelled as a velocity-ramp function in the scoring function to ensure correct cost
estimates. This is done by calculating the time it takes to travel from one point by using
a finite acceleration, and can be approximated using a velocity-ramp function, thereby
adding an extra cost of travel between tasks by enforcing a complete stop between tasks.
The time it takes to travel the distance dji , the cumulative distance to the task j
in agent i's path pi using a maximum velocity and acceleration, vmax and amax , can be
estimated using a velocity-ramp model as follows [45, 87]:
 r
4dji
if dji < da 2


amax ,
vmax
τij (pi ) = , where da = (5.7)
dji amax
 vmax + if dji ≥ da

amax vmax ,

The velocity ramp in equation 5.4.1 is a conditional function where the case dji < da
describes the time it takes to travel a distance dji if the maximum velocity is not reached,
where the latter case dji > da describes the time travelling the distance da if the maximum
velocity is reached within the distance da . When a task is given as a trajectory, the function
τi (pi ) calculates the time it takes for an agent to traverse a set of trajectory tasks, from
the departure point of the previous task to the entry point of the next task, for each task
in the path pi . The direction in which the agent traverses the tasks thus greatly impacts
the score of the entire path Sipi . This means that when the agents construct their bundles
and bids on tasks, the direction of approach has to be taken into account for each task in
the local path bi , resulting in a task no longer only containing a reward c¯j and a point
but employ the trajectory task generalization in Eq. 5.4.
When an agent i builds its bundle and wants to add the task j to its bundle it will
swap the u0 and u1 if τ (puij1 ) < τ (puij0 ) and maximizing the marginal increase of the scoring
function (Eq. (5.8)):

(
0, if j ∈ bi
cij [bi ] = p ⊕ {j } (5.8)
maxn≤|pi | maxdir Si i n dir − Sipi , otherwise,
where jdir is the direction of approach to the trajectory task j and that results in the
highest reward based on the previous tasks and directions, effectively performing a greedy
optimization. When the first task is added, the agent calculates the score with respect to
its starting position.
Once an agent has won an auction for a task ji , before consensus, the agent will update
its own path list and reverse the candidate task ji if this provides the highest marginal gain,
before inserting it into pi at the position in the path which yields the highest marginal
gain, as per Eq. (5.2). The information about whether a task has been reversed or not
is not communicated to other agents, as this is not important for the allocation of the
tasks, similarly, the agent does not communicate the order of the tasks in their paths, but
only the information regarding the actual allocation, and thereby does not increase the
communication load of the CBBA algorithm.

5.5 Simulation and experiments
We first assess the performance of our decentralized trajectory task allocation approach
against a state-of-the-art centralized method [45], and we then assess scalability on the
AC300 benchmark dataset [87].
In the experiments, we use the discounted reward scoring function in Eq. (5.6) with
the discount factor λ = 0.95. The capacity of each robot Lt is the maximum flight time
in seconds, and the sum of a UAV's path costs cannot exceed this capacity. We use the
velocity-ramp model to estimate the time for an agent to travel between points, with
vmax = 3 m/s and amax = 1 m/s2 in all experiments. Furthermore, the agents use a
fully connected network topology for communication, though this is not always possible
in search and rescue missions, the effects of network topology and inconsistent situational
awareness have shown to be minimal [51]. To guarantee convergence, we use a maximal
assignment factor ω = 15, which avoids auctioning the same tasks repeatedly in certain
situations as proposed in [91].
The algorithms and software developed in this study were implemented in Python, and
the experiments were performed on a workstation with an Intel Core i5-9400F 2.90 GHz
CPU and 16 GB of RAM running Ubuntu 20.04.
We compare our approach of decentralized trajectory task allocation against a state-ofthe-art centralized algorithm [45] using the AC300 dataset [87] to assess performance and
potential overhead resulting from using our decentralized method. The AC300 dataset
contains 300 realistic outdoor environments. This dataset is based on the EPFL aerial
rooftop dataset [112] to provide coverage areas with realistic environments including obstacles. The dataset consists of 300 environments each with a total area of 10, 000 m2 and
containing between 0 and 15 obstacles. The aerial robot used in the simulation has a 3 m2
field-of-view, which results in between 35 to 161 trajectory tasks generated for sufficient
coverage. The trajectory tasks are generated by decomposing the polygon including the
obstacles into sub-polygons and generating a boustrophedon (lawn-mower) coverage pat-

tern for each sub-polygon [45]. We use the coverage lines generated in [45] and convert
them to trajectory tasks for our decentralized task allocation algorithm to enable a fair
comparison.
The sum of the agent route costs, in seconds, is evaluated for all the environments and
summarized as a total duration for the dataset for both methods using two agents with
1200 s capacity each. The centralized method achieved a total duration of 544592 s and our
method achieved 554920 s, and shows that our decentralized trajectory task generalization
and methods of estimating the costs only use 10328 s more time resulting in an overhead
cost of 1.9% using multiple UAVs when compared to the state-of-the-art centralized areacoverage planning method.

5.5.1 Point tasks vs. trajectory tasks
To assess the efficacy and scalability of our solution for multi-UAV coverage planning in
realistic environments, we use the AC300 dataset [87]. The initial position, the depot,
is randomised for all the problems and is common for all agents, to ensure an unbiased
comparison with our solution and the current state-of-the-art centralized methods, which
uses a common depot for all agents. This is not a constraint and decentralized planning
can be conducted regarding the initial positions of the agents. The original datasets are
available in [113], and we have made our datasets with the extracted trajectory tasks
publicly available in [114].

Figure 5.2: Shows a comparison of the total travel time of all routes computed using the
point scoring function and trajectory scoring function. The results are computed for two
UAVs, each with a capacity of 1200 s.

The impact of our decentralized task allocation algorithm is validated by comparing

(a) Point estimation (b) Trajectory estimation

Figure 5.3: Shows a comparison of example routes generated by using (a) the point estimation method, and (b) the trajectory estimation method using an environment with the
size of 100 × 100m from the AC300 dataset. The coverage plans were generated by two
UAVs with a capacity of 1200 s, whose paths are orange and blue, respectively.

two different types of scoring functions, (i) a single point cost estimation, by calculating
the Euclidean distance to the entry point of the trajectory task, and (ii) optimizing the
direction of the task and choosing the lowest-cost direction of travel on the task. We
conducted the experiments considering two agents, each with a 1200 s capacity. The
comparison of the total travel cost between the two different methods is shown in Fig 5.2.
As can be seen in the figure, our trajectory task approach generates lower-cost routes over
different numbers of UAVs, with an average improvement of 6% over the point estimation
method.
It is important to note that the performance improvement of the trajectory task estimation method is not the only improvement to the decentralized coverage planning problem.
When allowing permutation of the direction for a coverage task, it is possible to generate
routes that are intuitive for a human operator. In Fig 5.3, examples of routes generated
using the two different evaluation methods are shown, and here it is clear that the routes
calculated using our method are simpler and more intuitive. Simplicity is paramount for
the situational awareness of the operator in a SAR mission and might be a critical factor
for an operator to accept an autonomous system [2].
To test the scalability of the proposed approach, we ran the trajectory task allocation
algorithm on multi-UAV systems consisting of 2 to 14 agents, see Fig. 5.4. As can be seen
in the figure, the time to completion is significantly improved when adding more UAVs,
with an average maximum travel time of 972 s for two UAVs, down to an average travel
time of 229 s when 14 UAVs are used. However, the reduction in time to completion of
adding more agents stagnates at around 10 UAVs and there is no significant improvement
using more than 10 units. The optimal number of UAVs will vary based on the size of the
environment.

Figure 5.4: Comparison between the highest travel time for a single agent in the AC300
problems, across 2 to 14 agents in steps of 2 agents with the capacity constraints set to
1500 s, 750 s, 600 s and the remaining to 500 s, respectively.

5.5.2 Convergence
The convergence and stability of the system are critical in a SAR operation, therefore it is
important to ensure that the algorithm converges within a reasonable timeframe while still
providing good solutions. We conducted a set of experiments to determine the number
of iterations required to converge for different numbers of agents, see Fig. 5.5. As can be
seen in the figure, the trajectory planning algorithm scales efficiently with the number of
agents. There is only a slight increase in iterations when the number of agents is increased,
which means that the trajectory task allocation algorithm scales well.
The computational complexity of the trajectory algorithm shares the same computational complexity as CBBA for the bundle construction, see Eq. (5.3). This means that
if the capacity of the agents is decreasing proportionally to the increase in the number of
agents, the computation time of constructing the bundle does not increase. As a result, the
proposed algorithm converges quickly for multi-robot scenarios containing many capacityconstrained robots, and as the results show, decentralization comes with low overhead
when compared to state-of-the-art centralized coverage planning algorithms.

5.6 Conclusions
Search and rescue scenarios are time-critical operations, and robust, effective task allocation is crucial when multi-UAV systems are used. In this paper, we presented a
novel approach to decentralized task allocation for capacity-constrained robots for cover-

Figure 5.5: Comparison between the different number of agents and their respective iterations to convergence using the AC300 dataset across 2 to 14 agents in steps of 2 agents
with the capacity constraints set to 1500 s, 750 s, 600 s and the remaining to 500 s, respectively, for all environments in the AC300 dataset. Diamonds represent outliers.

age planning problems. We generalized the notion of tasks to include trajectories, taking
into account the spatial nature of coverage planning in the decentralized marked-based
task allocation algorithm CBBA. The results show that (i) the approach presented in this
paper is capable of generating coverage plans that are competitive with state-of-the-art
centralized planners despite being decentralized, and (ii) that it scales well with system
size.
In this study, we considered that each trajectory task was a line segment that could
be travelled in two different directions. However, a trajectory task can, in principle, be a
collection of several line segments or even some non-linear path. The number of tasks that
are auctioned during the task allocation process can thus be adjusted based on the available
resources: if a search area is very large and a large number of line segments must be covered,
each trajectory task could be a cluster of line segments; while if an area is small, more finegrained trajectory tasks could be defined. In future work, we will investigate clustering
line segments to optimize the task allocation process and study dynamic scenarios where
UAVs may become available or unavailable during a mission. Our long-term objective is to
showcase the efficacy of the proposed methods within a realistic simulation environment
that systematically considers dynamic and volatile communication conditions, along with
physical constraints. This environment will facilitate the deployment of our proposed
methods on physical multi-UAV systems in the field.
