Automated Task Generation for Multi-Drone Search and Rescue Operations

Automated Task Generation for
Multi-Drone Search and Rescue
Operations

Published as: Grøntved, K. A. R., Christensen, A., & Bahodi, M.-T. (2025). "Automated Task Generation for Multi-Drone Search and Rescue Operations". In Distributed
Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Special Sessions II, 21st International Conference
(pp. 266-271). Springer. https: // doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3-031-80946-0_ 26 [9]

Chapter Abstract Drones are currently an indispensable tool for emergency response
teams performing wilderness Search And Rescue (SAR), as they can cover large and possibly inaccessible areas efficiently. It is, however, still unclear how a drone operator can
effectively engage and control a system composed of multiple autonomous robots, especially in unstructured and outdoor environments. This paper reports on ongoing work
in the project HERD - Human-AI Collaboration: Engaging and Controlling Swarms
of Robots and Drones [10], in which we focus on how to enable an operator to control
multi-drone systems.
We present a tool for generating tasks and plans for multiple drones in wilderness
SAR scenarios. The central aspect of our approach is to improve the search quality by
automatically generating tasks to ensure timely coverage of high-risk areas, such as ditches,
lake/sea banks, and beneath tree lines, where distressed people are likely to be found.

4.1 Introduction
Drones have become a valuable tool for emergency response teams conducting search-andrescue operations [2]. Drones can effectively cover large and possibly inaccessible areas [4,
10], while capable of solving complex missions effectively [85]. Single-drone systems are
typically operated through remote control or have limited autonomous decision-making
capabilities. On the other hand, multi-drone systems have a lot of potential since the
drones can work in parallel, covering a search area more effectively than a single-drone
system. It is, however, still unclear how a drone operator can effectively engage and control

a system composed of multiple autonomous robots, especially in unstructured and outdoor
environments. This paper reports on ongoing Ph.D. research in the project HERD -
Human-AI Collaboration: Engaging and Controlling Swarms of Robots and Drones [10],
in which we focus on how to enable an operator to control multi-drone systems. However,
to effectively conduct a search using a multi-drone system, it needs to be controllable
by a single operator, which means that the system must have a relatively high level of
autonomy. For example, it should be able to automatically assign search trajectories to
drones based on a high-level mission specification [2, 11]. Multiple solutions to the task
allocation problem, both centralized and decentralized, have been presented [11,45,51,91],
as well as extensions to accommodate for convergence time [92] and complex tasks [11].
However, it is still unclear (i) how to automatically generate realistic SAR tasks, and
(ii) how to prioritize the tasks to conduct a SAR mission most efficiently. It is important
to model the priorities of the drones appropriately to ensure that urgent tasks are addressed
first. Additionally, any changes in the priorities need to be effectively communicated to the
drone(s), to convey the intent of the operator. This is vital to ensure the rescue team can
respond quickly and efficiently to changing situations. Especially when potential targets
are located, the next steps need to be planned carefully. In my Ph.D., we aim to find
answers to these questions regarding autonomous search-and-rescue operations.

4.2 Problem Statement
In multi-drone systems for search and rescue, the problem of multi-task assignment arises
frequently [4]. One such use case is in SAR missions, where multiple drones need to
be assigned different tasks, such as reconnaissance or area coverage. To solve this problem, a decentralized algorithm, called the consensus-based bundle algorithm (CBBA) [51],
has been proposed. CBBA is an auction-based algorithm that can be used to solve the
multi-drone multi-task assignment problem. The algorithm iterates between a bundleconstruction phase, in which tasks are assembled into bundles based on their availability
and priority, and a conflict-resolution phase, in which consensus is reached on the allocation of tasks to drones. The task-allocation algorithm aims to assign a list of Na drones
to Nt tasks without any conflicts while maximizing a global objective. In a mission, the
global objective function is the sum of all local objective functions for each drone. The
local reward is based on the tasks assigned to the drone and the order of their execution.
The underlying problem of CBBA, the multi-drone and multi-task assignment problem,
can also be formulated as a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) problem [93]:
N
X a N
Xt

max Fij (x, τ )xij
x,τ
i=1 j=1
(4.1)
s.t. H(x, τ ) ≤ d
Na ×Nt
x ∈ {0, 1}Na ×Nt , τ ∈ R+ ∪ ∅

,
where Fij is the score function for drone i servicing the task j, with respect to the
tasks assigned to the drone. H and d define a set of Nc possibly non-linear constraints
x ∈ {0, 1}Na ×Nt , is a set of Na × Nt binary decision variables, xij , to indicate the assigned

task j to an drone i. τ is a set of real-positive variables τij , describing when drone i will
service the task j [93]. In the context of a SAR operation, Fij represents the value for
covering a search area, or a part of a search area, for instance following a certain trajectory [11], and the constraints H represent energy limitations, no-fly zones, and so on. In
this Ph.D. project, we have proposed to utilize CBBA [51], to solve the multi-drone multitask assignment problem in equation 4.1, where each drone creates a greedy assignment
of the tasks and creates a consensus with other drones about the allocation. The greedy
assignment is made using a trajectory task assignment extension to CBBA, which allows
for evaluating tasks modeled as trajectories, such as coverage tasks [11]. Additionally,
using bid warping [93] allows for more complex objectives. However, whenever a complex
mission is changed dynamically, it becomes necessary to develop strategies for efficient
reallocation of resources.

4.3 OFS: The Overview, Focused, Systematic search
method
In this Ph.D., the main focus is cooperation between autonomous drones toward solving
a common goal while allowing operators to control the overall objective. Therefore, it is
important to consider existing frameworks and domain experience. The Danish Emergency Management Agency (DEMA) has developed a framework called: Overview, Focus,
Systematic (OFS), for conducting SAR operations using drones, including prioritization
of tasks in different environments. Our approach utilizes the OFS-method as the foundational reasoning tool, to ensure that the operator can conduct a mission efficiently using
our multi-drone approach. By utilizing the OFS-method we can model tasks and facilitate
dynamic re-planning strategies, making SAR operations more efficient. The OFS-method
has been developed based on multiple international best practice reports and guides to
manual search and rescue in two internal field trials conducted by DEMA, where their best
practice methods were compared to the OFS-method [94]. DEMA has conducted extensive
research on drones for emergency management, including interviews with key personnel
and workshops with national emergency management agency divisions. They used various
sources such as IEDO best practice report [94], EENA drone efficacy study [95], and Lost
Person Behavior application which is based on the International Search and Rescue Incident Database (ISRID) [20], with over 50.000 incidents. Based on this research, DEMA
conducted four field trials comprising 18 experiments and 180 simulated missing persons.
The OFS search method has three phases: Overview, Focused, and Systematic. Before
starting, it is important to know about the missing person's mental state, behavior, and
last known location. The overview phase consists of an overview rotation and an overview
route, where a drone covers the search area and creates markers used in the next phase
based on the missing person's behavioral profile. An overview route is illustrated in Fig.
4.1a.
The focused search consists of a high-risk-search and a probabilistic-search, where both
types are identified in the overview phase. The high-risk-search has the highest priority,
as the person's health might be at risk, and, therefore, it is important to cover. The
probabilistic-search consists of places where the person is most likely to end up and is based

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 4.1: (a) Shows a search in an urban area with a overview route marked with
the dashed red line, including targets of value illustrated by the red map markers. (b)
Illustrates the tasks in the focused phase, where roads and wetlands are marked with red
and blue respectively. (c) The coverage pattern is illustrated as red dashed lines and is
used in the systematic phase.

on statistics from the ISRID dataset, and is illustrated in Fig. 4.1b. The systematic phase
consists of a search using a set of boustrophedon coverage patterns [86] with a specific
flight configuration, consisting of an altitude, camera angle, and speed, that enables a
drone operator assistant to analyze the camera feed in real-time and is shown in Fig. 4.1c.
In some scenarios, a second coverage is performed, but perpendicular to the previous
search, which increases the probability of detection.

4.4 Translating OFS into Multi-Drone Objectives and
Tasks
In search-and-rescue operations, drone operators often face a wide range of environments
in which the type of coverage tasks vary widely. These tasks are usually created manually
and require careful consideration of various environmental factors and seasonal changes.
However, to improve efficiency and accuracy, we are exploring automated approaches to
task generation. We utilize data from OpenStreetMap [96] and local weather information,
we propose a system that automatically generates tasks for drones based on the current
environment. Our previous work [11] generalized the notion of tasks to include trajectories,
taking into account the spatial nature of coverage planning in the decentralized marketbased task allocation algorithm CBBA, which will be utilized in the task generation. In
the OFS-method, DEMA identifies potential pitfalls in conducting a search-and-rescue
operation in different environments. To determine high-probability areas, modelling the

individual's profile is crucial. Our tool, TrajGenPy 1 , automates the task generation based
on environmental features while taking into account the OFS-method. Flat terrain may
appear easy to navigate using drones, but assuming complete coverage can be dangerous as
environmental features such as gorges, ditches, and vegetation may obstruct the view. Hilly
terrain presents a challenge in discovering targets because of the landscape, often covered
by forests or foliage, which complicates target identification. In areas containing wetlands,
careful consideration must be given to wind and water currents because waves can create
blind spots, which impact the effectiveness of the systematic search patterns. Urban
searches are complex due to the number of locations where a person might seek shelter.
During emergency response missions, teams have to adapt to changes in information and
adjust their priorities accordingly. This means that operators need to be able to engage
with a multi-drone system and make changes on the fly. In the event of a potential
survivor being detected or a change in mission priorities, drones may need to apply different
strategies based on their circumstances. For instance, withholding information from drones
that cannot perform the task in a suitable time frame may be necessary to allow for more
efficient use of resources. By not considering drones that are unlikely to accept the task,
time and energy can be focused on drones that are more likely to complete it within the
desired time frame. We evaluate a drone's ability to perform a certain task based on
different criteria, such as the minimum travel time in the environment or a deadheaded
travel time to the task. To assess the performance of the re-planning strategies and the
objective functions based on the OFS-method, we will define a common performance
metric. Commonly, a performance measure of a CBBA system is given as the sum of
objective functions for each drone or the amount of allocated tasks [45,92,93]. Though this
might not be representative of a SAR operation, as the global goal is to find a potential
survivor as fast as possible, therefore a more fitting metric is to evaluate the time to
detection given an environment with targets sampled throughout the environment, based
on real incident data, for example from the ISRID database.

4.5 Discussion and Future work
In this paper, we presented ongoing work on a tool, TrajGenPy, for generating tasks for
search-and-rescue operations. This tool leverages environmental features and specifications
from the OFS-method to generate effective search-and-rescue tasks. Further research will
be conducted to test this tool using the same field trials provided by DEMA and sampled
data from real SAR incident reports. Additionally, we plan to explore multi-drone searchand-rescue scenarios, prioritizing tasks in a manner similar to the OFS-method. Our
ultimate goal is to allow operators to engage with multi-drone systems and improve the
efficiency of search-and-rescue operations.

1
https://github.com/kasperg3/trajgenpy
