Article
SAREnv: An Open-Source Dataset and Benchmark Tool for
Informed Wilderness Search and Rescue Using UAVs
Kasper Andreas Rømer Grøntved 1,* , Alejandro Jarabo-Peñas 1 , Sid Reid 2, Edouard George Alain Rolland 1 ,
Matthew Watson 2, Arthur Richards 2 , Steve Bullock 2 and Anders Lyhne Christensen 1
1 SDU UAS Center, MMMI, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense, Denmark;
alejp@mmmi.sdu.dk (A.J.-P.); edr@mmmi.sdu.dk (E.G.A.R.); andc@mmmi.sdu.dk (A.L.C.)
2 Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TR, UK; sid.reid@bristol.ac.uk (S.R.);
matt.watson@bristol.ac.uk (M.W.); arthur.richards@bristol.ac.uk (A.R.); steve.bullock@bristol.ac.uk (S.B.)
* Correspondence: kaspergrontved@proton.me
Highlights
What are the main findings?
• We introduce SAREnv, a novel, open-source benchmark for wilderness search and
rescue (SAR), which includes a dataset of 60 high-resolution geospatial scenarios and
probabilistic lost person models derived from empirical data.
• A comprehensive evaluation framework is provided with four baseline multi-agent
path-planning algorithms, three quantitative performance metrics, and tools that enable
users to generate custom synthetic SAR datasets.
What is the implication of the main finding?
• This work addresses a deficiency in SAR research by providing a standardized framework for the systematic and reproducible comparison of UAV search strategies.
• The open-source nature of this benchmark is intended to accelerate innovation by
enabling researchers to rigorously validate novel algorithms against established
baselines, facilitating the development of more effective autonomous systems for
real-world operations.
Abstract
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) play an increasingly vital role in wilderness search and
rescue (SAR) operations by enhancing situational awareness and extending the capabilities
of human teams. Yet, a lack of standardized benchmarks has impeded the systematic
evaluation of single- and multi-agent path-planning algorithms. This paper introduces
an open-source dataset and evaluation framework to address this gap. The framework
comprises 60 geospatial scenarios across four distinct European environments, featuring
high-resolution probability maps. We present a lost person probabilistic model derived
from statistical models of lost person behavior. We provide a suite of tools for evaluating
search paths against four baseline methods: Concentric Circles, Pizza Zigzag, Greedy,
and Random Exploration, using three quantitative metrics: Accumulated probability of
detection, time-discounted probability of detection, and lost person discovery score. We
provide an evaluation framework to facilitate the comparative analysis of single- and multiagent path-planning algorithms, supporting both the baseline methods presented and
custom user-defined path generators. By providing a structured and extensible framework,
this work establishes a foundation for the rigorous and reproducible assessment of UAV
search strategies in complex wilderness environments.

Keywords: search and rescue; path planning; UAV; multi-UAV coordination; benchmark;
dataset; autonomous systems; simulation; environments
1. Introduction
Search and rescue (SAR) operations have long incorporated robots and unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to help locate lost persons in vast and difficult terrains [1,2]. These
UAVs provide invaluable aerial reconnaissance, expanding both the field of view and
the operational speed of human teams. In practice, SAR teams combine terrain data, lost
person demographics, and other contextual information to guide their search for missioncritical real-time imagery. A common approach involves determining the probable lost
person locations based on the terrain profile, such as elevation, vegetation, trails, and the
characteristics of the lost person [3]. The search then typically begins from a designated
initial planning point (IPP) [4,5], as illustrated in Figure 1 as the center of the circles.
Figure 1. A representation of our environment model and benchmark methodology that models four
different regions of interest (RoIs) represented by circles. The center of each circle indicates the initial
planning point (IPP). The figure includes a probability map based on the lost person model, shown
as the yellow/red area over the terrain, and displays potential search paths for the UAVs that utilize
our provided lost person model.
A wide range of algorithmic approaches for autonomous SAR planning [1] in different
challenges [6] have been explored. Classic techniques focus on coverage path planning (CPP),
aiming to systematically sweep a polygonal area with minimal overlap [7]. In parallel,
probabilistic search methods try to maximize the expected likelihood of locating the lost
person, using either adaptive [8] or non-adaptive strategies [9]. For example, greedy search
policies may target the current highest-probability location, while partially observable

Markov decision process (POMDP)-based methods model sequential decision making over
time [10].
Another class of methods, known as ergodic exploration, seeks to allocate search effort
proportionally to the underlying probability distribution by ensuring that the time spent
in each region is proportional to the spatial density of lost persons [11,12]. Similarly,
probabilistic priors are also leveraged in sampling-based planning algorithms to bias
exploration toward high-information regions, thus maximizing expected information gain
across the environment [13,14].
Despite these advances, the SAR community lacks standardized benchmarks and
public datasets to systematically evaluate search strategies [15]. This absence hinders the
reproducibility and comparability of algorithmic innovations. In contrast, computer vision
has greatly benefited from canonical datasets such as CIFAR-10 [16] and ImageNet [17],
which have catalyzed progress through standardized evaluation pipelines. Although there
are some vision-based SAR datasets, such as the maritime-focused SeaDronesSee dataset [18]
and the combined thermal and image-based wilderness SAR datasets WiSARD [19], there is
currently no publicly available dataset for evaluating UAV-based search planning strategies
in wilderness settings.
Many recent approaches to UAV-based search and rescue rely on high-resolution
environmental data and probabilistic models to guide decision making. However, direct
comparisons between methods are often ad hoc, and each study uses its own terrain,
parameters, and simulation conditions [15]. This makes it difficult to assess whether
a proposed algorithm generalizes well across different environments and how well it
performs given a specific metric. To address this gap, we introduce a comprehensive public
dataset and evaluation framework for SAR search planning using UAVs, based on real data
from lost person behavior [5].
Our contribution comprises 60 high-resolution SAR environments sampled within Europe(detailsinSection2). Thesescenariosencompassavarietyofclimates(dryandtemperate)
and topographies (flat and mountainous) to ensure diverse evaluation conditions. Each data
point includes a 30 × 30 m resolution probability map of the prior probabilities of finding
a lost person, which is modeled on established lost person behavior statistics [5] (details
in Section 2.1); see the example in Figure 1. Furthermore, to facilitate robust algorithmic
evaluation, we provide a benchmarking framework that allows for direct comparison against
two exhaustive baseline models, a greedy planner, and a random planner using common
performance metrics (details in Section 3). An example of its usage is shown in Listing 1,
which demonstrates how to evaluate search paths generated by the predefined baselines in a
single environment and visualize the results for straightforward comparison.
Listing 1. A simple search path evaluation code example to evaluate the predefined baselines.
evaluator = ComparativeEvaluator(
dataset_directory=data_dir,
evaluation_sizes=["large"],
num_drones=10,
num_lost_persons=100,
)
results = evaluator.run_baseline_evaluations()
evaluator.plot_results(results)
In summary, our work fills a critical gap by providing a standardized open-source
benchmark and dataset for SAR search planning, namely, a dataset of detailed geospatial
scenarios, corresponding probability models derived from the lost person behavior model,
a suite of baseline planners, and common evaluation metrics. By providing a shared and

realistic testing ground, this work lays the foundation for objective, systematic, and directly
comparable evaluations of search algorithms in wilderness SAR. This resource is intended
to accelerate progress in informed drone search as common benchmarks have advanced
other fields [15]. Our wilderness SAR dataset [20] and tools have been made publicly
available on GitHub under the MIT license (https://github.com/namurproject/SAREnv,
accessed on 1 September 2025), facilitating reproducible research and fostering innovation
in SAR drone missions.
Related Work
The time-critical nature of SAR operations, compounded by the finite endurance and
range of UAVs, requires the use of optimized path planning. The probability of survivor
recoverydecreasesrapidlyovertime[5], motivatingthedevelopmentofinformation-driven
search strategies and requiring a rigorous comparison of path-planning methodologies.
A fundamental approach to area search is coverage path planning (CPP), where the
primary objective is to generate a route that ensures that a sensor footprint passes over
the entirety of a defined area at least once [21]. Its applications are diverse, ranging
from agricultural spraying [22] to terrain mapping [23]. In the context of SAR, search
teams have long employed coverage-based patterns, such as expanding spirals or parallel
sweeps [24,25]. For UAV-based SAR missions, the most elementary CPP method is the
boustrophedon, or "lawnmower," pattern, which is simple to implement manually or
autonomously [26]. However, a principal limitation of exhaustive coverage methods is their
inherent inefficiency in terms of time and energy consumption, particularly when applied
to large, complex search areas [27]. To mitigate these inefficiencies, several adaptations
have been proposed. One strategy involves decomposing the search area into smaller and
manageable cells, enabling parallel coverage by a team of multiple UAVs to reduce the
total mission time [28,29]. Another approach is hierarchical teaming, which employs a
high-altitude UAV for coarse, wide-area surveillance. A secondary low-altitude UAV is
then tasked with performing a detailed and fine-grained search within specific RoIs [30].
In contrast to exhaustive coverage, informative path planning aims to maximize the
acquisition of relevant information per unit of time or distance traveled [31,32]. This is often
achieved by incorporating a probabilistic framework, such as a probability of containment
(POC) map, which represents the likelihood that the lost person is located at different
points within the search area. For instance, Lin and Goodrich [33] demonstrated a method
where the UAV's path is directed toward regions with the highest probability of containing
the target, thereby prioritizing the most promising areas first. Hybrid methodologies
combine the strengths of both coverage and informative path planning. An alternative to
conventional informative path planning is to adapt coverage path planning techniques. In
this approach, the operational area is partitioned into disjointed high-likelihood sub-regions
based on a prior probability map. Each sub-region is then treated as a node in a traveling
salesman problem, allowing the determination of the optimal sequence for executing the
coverage tasks [34].
The lack of standardized datasets and benchmarks in SAR path planning complicates
the quantitative comparison of different algorithms, often forcing researchers to rely on
custom simulations with limited generalizability. To address the scarcity of publicly available real-world data, the generation of large-scale synthetic datasets, similar to approaches
in related fields, presents a viable solution to create robust and repeatable test cases [35].
This work addresses a gap in the state of the art: the absence of a standardized framework for rigorously comparing UAV path-planning algorithms in wilderness SAR, which
is paramount if such systems are to be safely and efficiently implemented in real-world
applications [1,36]. We introduce a benchmark dataset to enable reproducible evaluations.

Our contribution is a suite of realistic environments designed for testing both single- and
multi-drone path-planning strategies. By providing a common ground with complex terrain and configurable scenarios, this dataset establishes a necessary foundation for the
objective and systematic comparison of path-planning algorithms.
2. Materials and Methods
For each of the four types of terrain-temperate flat, temperate mountainous, dry flat,
and dry mountainous-we selected 15 representative regions of interest (RoIs), resulting in
a total of 60 geospatial scenarios within Europe. These RoIs were curated to span a wide
range of environmental conditions and are categorized into three types based on their
geospatial characteristics: (i) Feature-rich areas contain a high density of various elements,
such as roads, trails, water bodies, and buildings, explicitly excluding urban regions;
(ii) feature-homogeneous areas are dominated by a single land cover or feature type, for
example, extensive forested regions or large agricultural fields; (iii) water-dominant areas
include substantial water presence, encompassing coastlines, large lakes, and major rivers.
Each scenario includes global metadata describing key attributes of the environment
and spatial parameters. These fields specify the environment type, climate zone, central
coordinates of the region, resolution of the probability map, and search radius. Specifically,
the metadata comprise the type of environment, which describes the terrain, the climate
classification, and the IPP, given as latitude and longitude coordinates representing the
center of the region. The resolution defines the size (in meters) of each cell in the probability
map, while the search radius (in kilometers) sets the extent of the RoI. Furthermore, the
dataset includes geospatial features relevant to SAR extracted from OpenStreetMap [37] and
categorized according to the lost person behavior framework [5]. Each feature is represented
in GeoJSON format with associated properties such as feature type, geometric area, and
the probability that a lost person is located within that feature.
Beyond providing this standardized dataset, we have also made a set of tools available
that enable users to generate customized scenarios that are tailored to their specific requirements. An example of generating a dataset with the default probabilities and features can
be seen in Listing 2. These tools allow modification of key parameters such as probability map resolution, search radii, and selection or weighting of geospatial features. This
flexibility allows researchers and practitioners to create diverse test cases and adapt the
dataset to a wide range of environments and operational contexts, facilitating the broader
experimentation and evaluation of SAR search-planning algorithms.
Listing 2. Data-generation example code, which uses default feature types and probabilities. The
code generates a dataset at a specific location, which is in a flat environment and a temperate climate.
data_gen = DataGenerator()
initial_planning_point = LON, LAT
output_dir = "sarenv_dataset"
data_gen.export_dataset(
center_point=initial_planning_point,
output_directory=output_dir,
environment_climate=CLIMATE_TEMPERATE,
environment_type=ENVIRONMENT_TYPE_FLAT,
meter_per_bin=30,
)

2.1. Feature Extraction and Environment Model
An informed search strategy relies critically on the quality of the environmental model
and the accuracy of the resulting prior probability map for the lost person's location.
To ensure robust performance, our framework employs a systematic methodology for
constructing these components. The process starts by extracting a discrete set of relevant
geospatial features, denoted as F = {f1, f2,..., fN}.
The environmental model is built using geospatial features sourced from OpenStreetMap (OSM). The choice of which features to extract is informed by empirical findings
from lost person behavior [5], which identifies strong correlations between found locations
and specific environmental characteristics, as summarized in Table 1. Our toolset enables
the automatic querying and extraction of these feature classes from OSM data for any
specified RoI, thereby streamlining the model construction process.
Table 1. Distribution of find locations for lost persons by environmental feature, reported as percentages for temperate and dry environments. The table shows the proportion of cases found in each
feature class, with sample sizes indicated by n.
Find Location (%) Temperate Dry
n 312 196
Structure 13% 10%
Road 13% 17%
Linear 25% 31%
Drainage 12% 18%
Water 8% 9%
Brush 2% 2%
Scrub 3% 3%
Woods 7% 6%
Field 14% 1%
Rock 4% 2%
RoIs are circular areas centered on the IPP, with their sizes statistically derived from
the dispersal patterns in Table 2. To support analysis on multiple different scales, the
dataset provides four nested RoIs, which are referenced as small, medium, large, and extra
large. The radii of these RoIs correspond, respectively, to the first quartile, median, third
quartile, and 95th percentile of the horizontal distance traveled. For example, the radius of
the extra-large RoI can be up to 19.3 km for certain scenarios.
Table2. HorizontaldistancesfromtheIPPandtheircorrespondingcircularradiiforeachenvironment
type. These values define the radii for the four nested RoIs used for search analysis and planning:
small, medium, large, and extra large.
Horizontal Distance
from the IPP *
Temperate Dry
Mountains Flat Mountains Flat
n 568 274 221 58
Small 1.1 (3.8) 0.6 (1.1) 1.6 (8.0) 1.3 (5.3)
Medium 3.1 (30.2) 1.8 (10.2) 3.2 (32.2) 2.1 (13.8)
Large 5.8 (105.7) 3.2 (32.2) 6.5 (132.7) 6.6 (136.8)
Extra large 18.3 (1052.1) 9.9 (307.9) 19.3 (1170.2) 13.1 (539.1)
* Shown in the format: radii(km) (area(km2)).
A critical preprocessing step involves translating linear OSM features, such as trails or
streams, into searchable two-dimensional areas. This is accomplished by applying a buffer,

the same size as the grid size of the probability map, to the linear geometry, creating an
area that constitutes a feature fi ∈ F. Figure 2 visualizes the polygonal features extracted
within the extra-large RoI, corresponding to the area where 95% of lost persons are found.
460.0 465.0 470.0 475.0 480.0 485.0 490.0 495.0
Easting(km)
5030.0
5035.0
5040.0
5045.0
5050.0
5055.0
5060.0
5065.0
Northing (km)
Features
Brush
Drainage
Field
Linear
Road
Rock
Scrub
Structure
Water
Woodland
RoIs
Small(1.1km)
Medium(3.1km)
Large(5.8km)
ExtraLarge(18.3km)
Figure 2. Illustration of the data in the temperate mountainous terrain and the different radii
corresponding to the temperate mountainous environment type as per Table 2 and included in the
accompanying dataset (#19).
2.2. Probability Map Generation
Estimating the likelihood of locating a lost person in specific geographic areas is a
critical component of SAR operations. This section details a quantitative methodology for
assigning probabilities to a discrete set of geospatial features, F, to generate a probabilistic
map. The approach is based on statistical distributions derived from lost person behavior [5]
and the statistics in Tables 1 and 2 and integrates two primary sources of information: the
intrinsic likelihood of the different feature types, as in Table 1, and the spatial likelihood
associated with the distance to the IPP. The result is a normalized probability of area (POA)
for each geospatial feature, as seen in Table 2, which forms the basis for the strategic
allocation of search resources and the evaluation of SAR algorithms.
At the core of this methodology is the calculation of a relative score for each feature,
which is subsequently normalized across the search domain. This score relies on two
categories of probabilistic input. First, feature type probability, Ptype(τ): the prior probability
that a lost person is found in a feature of type τ based on historical data [5]. Second, the
spatial likelihood, modeled via a normal distribution to reflect the likelihood of finding a lost
person at a certain distance from the IPP.
The computation proceeds in multiple stages. First, we define a weight based on
the feature classification. Let T(f) denote the type of feature f. The type-based weight is
assigned as:
ωtype(f) = Ptype(T(f)) (1)

Next, we compute a spatial weight, ωspatial(f), based on the Euclidean distance d
between a given point in the environment and the IPP. This weight models the distancedependent likelihood of locating a lost person and is derived from the empirical distance
statistics presented in Table 2. A common method for assessing spatial distance involves
the use of statistical Euclidean distances, corresponding to the small, medium, large, and
extra large areas in our case, and is based on historical data [38]. However, the observed
distance data do not necessarily follow a standard spatial distribution such as a Gaussian,
that is, ωspatial(d) ∼ N(µLPB,σLPB), where µLPB and σLPB denote the mean and standard
deviation of the distance from the IPP.
To better capture the characteristics of the data, such as positive skew, we evaluated
three candidate probability distributions: the normal distribution, the gamma distribution,
which is positively skewed and exhibits heavier tails, and the log-normal distribution, which
is strictly positive and also positively skewed. For each environment listed in Table 2, we
fitted the distance data to each distribution using least-squares minimization and computed
the root mean square error (RMSE) between the empirical and fitted values. The total
RMSE in the four different environment types (temperate mountainous, temperate flat, dry
mountainous, and dry flat) was 6.83km for the normal distribution, 2.02km for the gamma
distribution, and 1.76km for the log-normal distribution. These results indicate that the
log-normal distribution provides the best overall fit to the data.
Consequently, we redefine the spatial likelihood model to follow a logarithmic normal
distribution ωspatial(d) ∼ LN(µLPB,σLPB). Here, µLPB and σLPB represent the parameters of the log-normal distribution, estimated from the log-transformed distance data for
each environment.
Assuming the independence between the type of feature and the spatial location, we
compute the overall likelihood score S(f) for a given geospatial feature f as the product of
its weight of the type of feature ωtype(f) and its spatial likelihood:
S(f) = ωtype(f) · ωspatial(f) (2)
This formulation yields a continuous distance-informed likelihood function that prioritizes
geospatial features located at distances from the IPP that are statistically consistent with
observed lost person behavior [5]. Finally, individual scores are normalized to produce a
valid probability distribution in the set F. The resulting POA for each feature fi is:
POA(fi) =
S(fi)
∑N
j=1 S(fj)
(3)
The complete set of probabilities POA(F) makes up the final probabilistic map. This
map is a core component of the dataset and serves as a foundational tool to evaluate and
compare the performance of SAR algorithms.
For use in robotic applications, feature-based vector data are converted into a spatially
explicit grid map. This representation is advantageous because it provides a uniform and
computationally efficient data structure that is directly compatible with the discretized
state spaces commonly used in many robotic path-planning algorithms [1,39]; see Figure 3
for an example.
The conversion process comprises two primary stages. First, each feature in F is independently rasterized into a separate binary grid. A grid is initialized with zero values
at a user-defined spatial resolution and assigned to the geographic limits of the data. The
algorithm then iterates through all geometric entities within that class and projects them onto
the grid to denote their spatial occupancy. This procedure is repeated for all feature classes,
yielding a set of binary grids, where each grid represents the spatial extent of a specific feature.

1×10−5
Figure 3. A probability map of environment #19 of the accompanying dataset generated using our
framework.
In the second stage, these binary grids are weighted and aggregated to generate
a final composite probability map. Each binary grid is multiplied by a feature-specific
probability scalar, representing the risk or likelihood associated with that feature. The
resulting weighted layers are subsequently combined into a single map. In locations where
features overlap, the highest probability value takes precedence. This method ensures
that high-probability features are not obscured by features assigned a lower probability.
The final output is a single grid map where each cell's value quantifies the maximum
feature-based probability at that location.
In summary, the sampling-based and rasterization approaches presented offer complementary strengths for deriving probabilities from GIS data. Sampling enables precise
queries at specific coordinates, while rasterization produces a spatially complete and
computationally efficient probability grid. Together, these methods provide high location precision and broad spatial coverage, forming a robust foundation for subsequent
robotic planning.
2.3. Modeling Lost Person Locations
A critical component of this dataset is the capacity for quantitative assessment of
path-planning algorithms. To facilitate this, it is necessary to generate synthetic lost person
locations within the environment based on established probability distributions. The
synthetic locations of lost persons are sampled according to the probability distributions
detailed in the previous section. The generation consists of a two-step method, where,
first, the type of feature is sampled based on the probability correlated with said feature,
weighted by the area they occupy according to Equation (3), and second, the location is
randomly sampled within that feature. For linear features, the point is sampled within
a buffer radius, the same size as the grid size of the rasterized probability map. By
employing a sampling-based method that utilizes only the discrete features, f, the random
generation of points is performed in a computationally efficient manner. This approach
provides an alternative to loading the entire rasterized probability map and using that as
the underlying distribution, which significantly reduces processing and memory overhead.
This ensures that the simulated scenarios are representative of realistic SAR statistics.
A user-definable parameter controls the percentage of sampled points that are placed
uniformly at random within the search area, rather than being drawn from the probability
distribution. This feature allows for the evaluation of algorithm performance under varying
degrees of model uncertainty and thus directly impacts the classic exploit/explore trade-off

in planning algorithms. Figure 4 illustrates the spatial distribution of lost persons within a
representative environment. It should be noted that the pseudo-random number generator
can be seeded by the user to ensure reproducible results.
460.0 465.0 470.0 475.0 480.0 485.0 490.0 495.0
Easting(km)
5030.0
5035.0
5040.0
5045.0
5050.0
5055.0
5060.0
5065.0
Northing (km)
Features
Brush
Drainage
Field
Linear
Road
Rock
Scrub
Structure
Water
Woodland
RoIs
LostPerson
Small(1.1km)
Medium(3.1km)
Large(5.8km)
ExtraLarge(18.3km)
Figure 4. An example of 300 generated lost person locations distributed throughout a search environment. The majority of points are clustered in high-probability areas.
3. Results
To enable the standardized and reproducible evaluation of UAV search strategies, we
provide an open-source SAR evaluation benchmark. This framework enables the direct
comparison of novel algorithms against a set of provided baseline planners using a suite of
quantitative performance metrics. The benchmark is designed to operate on the provided
dataset or user-generated scenarios, accounting for sensor parameters and the probabilistic
distribution of lost person locations. An example of its use is provided in Listing 1.
3.1. Baseline Planning Algorithms
The framework includes several baseline path-planning algorithms to serve as a
reference for comparison. These algorithms generate trajectories for a specified number of
drones, starting from the IPP. The included baseline planning algorithms are the following:
• Concentric Circles: A series of concentric circular paths is created and segmented
equally among the available drones.
• Pizza Zigzag: The circular search area is divided into wedge-shaped "slices," with
each drone assigned to cover one slice using a zigzag pattern (boustrophedon).
• Greedy: A path generator following a greedy policy, prioritizing not revisiting cells,
and performing random exploration if all neighboring spaces are visited.
• Random Exploration: Random exploration throughout the environment.
The search algorithms we evaluated fall into two categories based on their coverage
strategy. Exhaustive planners, such as the Concentric Circles and Pizza Zigzag patterns, are
designed to systematically cover the entire search area. In contrast, non-exhaustive planners
like the Greedy and Random Exploration algorithms do not guarantee complete coverage.
The Greedy planner, for example, iteratively directs the UAV to the adjacent location with
the highest probability density. Figure 5 shows an example of the Concentric Circles, Pizza
Zigzag, Greedy, and Random Exploration algorithms on a medium map. The performance

of any given search path π is quantified using a set of metrics that evaluate its overall
efficiency and effectiveness. Supplementary Video S1 shows examples of these metrics
and how they change over time for the different path-planning algorithms.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 5. Four coverage path strategies for three drones displayed over a medium probability
heatmap of environment #19 in the accompanying dataset. The individual paths for each drone are
distinguished by different shades of blue. The strategies shown are (a) Concentric Circles, (b) Pizza
Zigzag, (c) Greedy, and (d) Random Exploration.
3.2. Accumulated Probability of Detection
The accumulated probability of detection metric quantifies the probability of detecting
a lost person given a planned path and a prior probability distribution over the search
region. It is computed as the integral of the prior probability over the portions of the
environment visible from the path. Formally, for a path π, the likelihood is

L(π) =
Z
Aπ
Pprior(x)dx (4)
where Aπ denotes the area visible from π, and Pprior(x) is the prior probability of a lost
person being in the location x.
This formulation has been used in various SAR planning works [40], where cost
functions are designed to minimize the accumulated probability of not detecting the target.
Using L(π), the search paths are biased toward areas of high probability, leading to more
informed coverage strategies.
3.3. Time-Discounted Probability of Detection
To incentivize early discovery of high-likelihood regions, we introduce a temporal
discount factor on the accumulated probability gain. Specifically, for each area segment x
observed at time t, the contribution to the score is discounted by λt, where λ ∈ (0,1) controls the severity of the discount and can be seen in Equation (5). We chose this exponential
function because it provides a flexible and intuitive way to model time-based discounting,
starting with no discount at time t = 0 and smoothly decreasing as time progresses.
I(π) =
Z
Aπ
λt(x)
Pprior(x)dx (5)
Here, t(x) is the time at which the location x is observed. Similar constructs have been
used in early detection-sensitive planning approaches, where post-deadline detections are
penalized through multiplicative factors [40].
The discount factor, λ, is calculated based on a terminal time, tend, by which a desired
proportion of the total discounted value has been accumulated. To ensure that 95% of the
cumulative value, derived from the integral of the function over an infinite horizon, is
captured by tend, the discount factor is calculated using the following equation:
λ = (0.05)
tend (6)
This calculation of λ is especially important in domains such as SAR operations, where
the certainty of a lost person's location exhibits temporal decay. By defining tend as a
critical operational window, for example, the survivability limit, the resulting λ provides
a quantitative basis for resource allocation, concentrating 95% of operational assets in
the search areas of highest probability. This strategy optimizes efficiency under resource
constraints, accepting a calculated risk of missing outlier scenarios that reside in the
remaining 5% of the probability distribution.
3.4. Lost Person Discovery Score
The lost person discovery score measures the number of synthetic lost persons discovered during a path π. In each test case, a fixed number of lost persons is sampled
from a predefined distribution. π is then evaluated based on the number of lost persons
successfully located and is defined in Equations (7) and (8).
D(π) =
N
∑
i=1
I(π,vi) (7)
I(π,vi) =



1 if lost person vi is discovered during the path π
0 otherwise
(8)

Raw counts of lost persons found have been widely used in benchmarking settings
such as RoboCup Rescue [41]. More recent formulations include time-weighted variants
where early detections yield higher scores, as seen in [42], which optimizes both discovery
count and discovery time using multi-objective planning.
Together, these metrics and baseline planners provide an assessment for rigorously
benchmarking search strategies in wilderness SAR environments and are evaluated in
Section 3.5.
3.5. Benchmark Evaluations
We evaluated the baseline planning algorithms in 60 distinct datasets, evaluating their
performance using the metrics described above: accumulated probability of detection,
discounted probability of detection, and lost person discovery score. Since all evaluation
methods are included within the dataset, these results are fully reproducible by any dataset
user and require minimal code, as seen in Listing 1.
The results presented in Figure 6a indicate that, when budgets are insufficient for the
UAVs to cover the entire environment, the greedy planner's performance is comparable to
that of exhaustive methods. This is attributed to the short-term prioritization of high-value
areas by the greedy planner, and that the start positions of the agents are in high-probability
areas. Conversely, when the budget is sufficient for near-complete coverage of the area,
the greedy planner's performance diminishes due to the lack of long-term planning. It is
important to note that if the greedy planner were to start in a low- or uniform-probability
area, the greedy method degrades to a behavior analogous to the random exploration
algorithm, due to its short-term planning. Figure 6a,c, show that the exhaustive methods
generally outperform exploratory methods for both the cumulative probability of detection
and the lost person discovery score. However, as shown in Figure 6b, when considering
the time-discounted probability of detection, which favors initial exploration, the Greedy
and Random Exploration methods demonstrate better or equivalent performance.
Our framework supports custom path generators, enabling the scientific community
to evaluate their methods against an established baseline using either their datasets or
the one provided in this work [20]. A code example for this functionality is provided in
Listing 3.
C o n c e n t r i c
G
r e e d y
P i z z a
R a n d o m
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
L(π)
0.087
0.097
0.100
0.024
0.178
0.152
0.185
0.053
Budget
20km
60km
(a)
C o n c e n t r i c
G
r e e d y
P i z z a
R a n d o m
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
I(π)
0.002
0.005
0.003
0.002
0.002
0.005
0.003
0.002
Budget
20km
60km
(b)
C o n c e n t r i c
G
r e e d y
P i z z a
R a n d o m
D(π)
36.508
32.797
34.085
6.831
79.267
58.600
79.633
18.683
Budget
20km
60km
(c)
Figure 6. Evaluation of baseline algorithm performance (mean and 95% confidence intervals shown
as whiskers) on the complete dataset of 60 environments using two different budgets per UAV.
The figure presents the (a) accumulated probability of detection, (b) time-discounted probability
of detection, and (c) lost person discovery score. The experimental setup consisted of five UAVs
operating in medium-sized environments.

Listing 3. Instantiation of the ComparativeDatasetEvaluator for batch evaluation. This example
demonstrates the evaluation of two path generation algorithms, a custom generator (CustomLine)
and a predefined baseline (Greedy), across 60 datasets of varying sizes ("small," "medium," and
"large"). The evaluate method executes the comparison and stores the resulting metrics.
custom_generators = {
"CustomLine": create_custom_path_generator(),
"Greedy": PathGenerator("Greedy", paths.generate_greedy_path),
}
evaluator_custom = ComparativeDatasetEvaluator(
dataset_dirs=[f"sarenv_dataset/{i}" for i in range(1, 61)],
budget=100_000,
num_drones=args.num_drones,
evaluation_sizes=["small", "medium", "large"],
custom_generators=custom_generators,
)
metrics_df, time_series_df = evaluator.evaluate(output_dir="results")
4. Discussion
Synthetic data generation using SAREnv offers a valuable solution to the scarcity of
real-world SAR data by enabling the creation of large-scale, diverse, and repeatable test
cases at low cost [35]. This approach introduces a critical trade-off. The primary drawback is
the "sim-to-real" gap, where the performance of an algorithm in simulation may not directly
translate to real-world efficacy [43]. The validity of synthetic benchmarks is contingent
on the accuracy of the underlying environmental and behavioral models. The fidelity of
these evaluations can be improved by incorporating simulated human behavior models,
which aim to predict the actions and trajectories of a lost person based on psychological and
environmental factors over time [5,44,45]. A foundational assumption in our framework is
the statistical independence between feature-type probabilities and spatial probabilities
derived from the distance to the IPP (Equation (2)). This assumption may be invalid in
scenarios where a correlation exists between the distance traveled and the type of feature
sought by a lost person [5]. Such a discrepancy could lead to an inaccurate probability map,
thereby guiding search algorithms along sub-optimal paths. However, our current dataset
and the SAREnv framework do not incorporate the duration of time a person has been
missing, nor the complexities introduced by time-dependent probabilities. Addressing this
limitation in future work could improve the temporal fidelity of the models.
The rasterization method for handling overlapping geospatial features, which assigns
the maximum probability value to intersecting cells, currently does not consider the cumulative effect when multiple favorable features converge. This limitation may cause planners
to undervalue feature-rich zones. The data in lost person behavior [5] provide a path to
refinement by providing statistical distributions for how far from a feature individuals
are typically found. This could be used to generate a more nuanced probability gradient,
although it introduces a trade-off between model fidelity and computational complexity.
Deploying the framework to a new region requires high-resolution geospatial data and
baseline statistics on lost person behavior, analogous to the OpenStreetMap and ISRID data
used in this work. The fidelity of the probability maps is fundamentally dependent on
adapting the models to local terrain and behavioral patterns. The current version is EUcentric, as its scenarios were sampled from European environments, because data with as
much detail are few and far between in other regions. However, the architecture is designed
for broader applicability, and the open-source tools provided are extensible, enabling users
to integrate new datasets and probability models tailored to other geographical contexts,
once the data are available.

Scalability is another important consideration. The benchmark is designed to scale
effectively with the number of UAVs; exhaustive planners can partition the workloads,
while exploratory methods lend themselves to parallelization, as the presented planners
do not rely on inter-agent coordination. However, scaling the search area presents a
greater challenge, as the computational cost of generating higher-resolution or larger maps
increases with the RoI, although our approach already demonstrates the capability to
generate very large search areas, up to a size of 1170 km2 at a resolution of 30 m.
Despite these short-commings, the SAREnv dataset and framework already provide a
substantial contribution to the SAR research community. By combining high-resolution
geospatial data with a probabilistic lost person behavior model, it enables the creation of
standardized, repeatable, and diverse test scenarios that have previously been lacking in the
domain. The modular architecture of the framework is designed to facilitate the integration
of custom probability models, environmental feature layers, and path-planning algorithms,
supporting both controlled benchmarking and exploratory validation. Furthermore, the
framework and dataset are version controlled, ensuring that algorithmic comparisons
remain reproducible over time and enabling fair evaluations as new methods emerge. This
capability not only facilitates the consistent replication of experiments but also encourages
collaborative refinement of the benchmark, increasing its validity. Consequently, SAREnv
constitutes a scalable, extensible, and transparent foundation for advancing autonomous
SAR technologies.
5. Conclusions
This paper presented a systematic methodology and an open-source framework and
dataset [20] to address the lack of standardized benchmark evaluation for UAV-based wilderness SAR path planning. To address this gap, our framework provides 60 realistic geospatial
scenarios, probability maps derived from empirical lost person behavior data [5], a suite of
evaluation metrics, and four baseline planners to facilitate reproducible and comparative
research. The evaluation of the provided algorithms confirmed the key information on the
trade-off between the different search strategies in the baseline. Although exhaustive planners
are effective in maximizing total area coverage, our results demonstrated that the Greedy
algorithm provides better performance in time-critical scenarios under the metric of timediscounted probability of detection. This finding underscores the critical trade-off between
exhaustive coverage and the rapid and targeted investigation of high-probability areas. By
offering pre-defined metrics and baseline algorithms, the framework facilitates consistent and
objective benchmarking of different search strategies, and at the same time allows researchers
to implement and compare their own algorithms seamlessly. The current implementation
utilizes existing lost person data; however, the methodology is designed to adapt to novel
use cases that may incorporate different features and underlying probability distributions.
The framework is intended to support the generation of new datasets for novel applications. The open-source nature of the framework also allows researchers to integrate custom
datasets, path-planning methods, and probability models, thereby fostering collaboration and
innovation within the field of SAR-based single- and multi-agent path planning.
6. Future Work
Building on this foundation, future work will focus on improving the fidelity of
the environmental model. Key improvements will include integrating more advanced
models that account for terrain elevation and time-dependent probability decay, enabling
the generation of even more realistic probability distributions. To enhance the global
applicability of the framework, we will integrate supplementary geospatial data sources to
complement OpenStreetMap. This work aims to address current inconsistencies in data

coverage and detail and generally extend the dataset to contain datapoints outside the EU,
especially in developing countries. Furthermore, the lost person behavior also presents
models regarding the demographics of the lost person, which, in future work, will be used
to increase the fidelity of our framework.
We aim to iteratively expand on this framework, including the augmentation of the
dataset, the refinement of the underlying models, the incorporation of additional baseline
algorithms, and a comprehensive analysis of their performance. By providing an opensource and extensible framework, this work establishes a foundation for the rigorous and
comparative evaluation of path-planning algorithms, with the ultimate goal of accelerating
innovation in autonomous SAR technology.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/drones9090628/s1, Video S1: SAREnv: UAV Search and Rescue
Dataset and Evaluation Framework.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.A.R.G., A.J.-P., S.R. and A.L.C.; Methodology, K.A.R.G.,
A.J.-P. and S.R.; Software, K.A.R.G. and A.J.-P.; Validation, K.A.R.G.; Formal analysis, K.A.R.G.;
Investigation, K.A.R.G.; Resources, K.A.R.G.; Data curation, K.A.R.G. and E.G.A.R.; Writing-original
draft, K.A.R.G., A.J.-P., S.R. and A.L.C.; Writing-review & editing, K.A.R.G., A.J.-P., S.R., E.G.A.R.,
S.B. and A.L.C.; Visualization, K.A.R.G. and E.G.A.R.; Supervision, M.W., A.R., S.B. and A.L.C.;
Project administration, A.L.C.; Funding acquisition, A.L.C. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the Innovation Fund Denmark for the DIREC project (914200001B), the Independent Research Fund Denmark under grant 10.46540/4264-00105B (the NAMUR
project), and the WildDrone MSCA Doctoral Network funded by EU Horizon Europe under grant
agreement no. 101071224.
Data Availability Statement: The data and code presented in this study are openly available in
https://github.com/namurproject/SAREnv (accessed on 1 September 2025) [20] .
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
